
1

To what extent were the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki justified?
Introduction
The debate of whether or not the usage of atomic bombs was justified has been
ongoing among historians and others since the plan was first conceived. The Manhattan
project, started secretly in fear of a german atomic bomb by Franklin D. Roosevelt, was
the beginning of this tragedy(Jones 34). The project bore fruit during Truman’s
presidency, where it created two massive mushrooms that would never be forgotten.
This essay hopes to come to a conclusion regarding the extent to which the bombings
were justified. Although this issue has been widely debated, a definite conclusion has
not been reached and perhaps cannot be reached. While this could be considered a
deterrent, this essay hopes to take advantage of this arguability to come to an
independent conclusion. The topic of the justifiability of atomic bombs is more relevant
now than ever. As the years from the usage of the bombs increases, the nuclear
firepower that exists in the world has also increased which can and has led to rising
tensions such as what was seen in the cold war. This essay will start by examining the
impact of the Japanese culture and will move on to the impact of the Soviets and other
factors that contributed to the development and usage of the atomic bomb.

The Japanese Culture
To truly understand the thinking of all sides during this complicated crisis, we
must first understand the roots and culture of the Japanese people. The first thing that
comes to mind when one thinks of Japanese culture is samurai movies in which the

2

samurai code is emphasized as the focal reason for a character’s behavior or perhaps
seppuku, ritual suicide, occurs. Although the movies exaggerate many of the aspects of
this culture, there are many grains of truth embedded within. Particularly, the Bushido
code of honor that the Japanese samurai lived by is a relevant factor that needs to be
considered in this decision.
Bushido can be loosely compared to the European chivalry system. Both dictate
the way of life for a ‘gentleman’ but have different values. Chivalry was originally a code
of values for medieval knights and, similarly, Bushido is a code of values for the
samurai. While they both emphasize moral and just behaviour, Bushido’s focus is the
duty of the samurai to their feudal lord(Nitobe). This intense loyalty towards one’s ruler
was perpetuated since the time of the samurai, and during WW2, the sentiment
amongst the Japanese soldiers and civilians alike was that dying for the emperor was
as thoughtless as breathing. American soldiers facing such a selfless enemy could not
help but consider that their current strategy was not yielding results. For those
Japanese that were less inclined to die for their emperor, the no-surrender policy,
Senjinkun, provided the motivation they needed. According to Senjinkun, a captured
soldier returning home would face death(Straus 17-29). This provides insight into why
soldiers would rather die a relatively glorious death in the battlefield than surrender and
be unable to return to their home country without being dishonorably executed. The
almost eagerness to die in battle displayed showed to the American soldiers that drastic
measures would need to be taken in order to end the war.

3

This inclination towards death rather than dishonor was represented by tactics
like kamikaze, the banzai charge, and seppuku. Kamikaze pilots would ram their planes
into crucial parts of aircraft carriers in an attempt to sink the ship through the targeting
or demoralize the enemy through their willingness to sacrifice(Ohnuki-Tierney, 54). The
banzai charge was like the kamikaze except on land. It was essentially a bum rush
where the front line was used as fodder, hoping that the back lines could make it
through. Although this tactic was used in large scale confrontations, the bigger impact of
it came from the smaller scale attacks that were conducted by ‘surrendered’ or
supposedly dead Japanese. In addition, even children were throwing themselves at
American soldiers with whatever kitchen knife or farming tool they could find. “Mothers
clutching their babies [hurling]... themselves over the cliffs” was not an uncommon sight
reported by American soldiers. This almost ubiquitous nonmilitant defiance and refusal
to surrender led to massive civilian casualties as high as 2/3‘rds of the population in
some Japanese areas(Powers). All of these examples serve to prove that traditional
military tactics that would lead to surrender in other countries were not going to work in
Japan. So, something new would be needed, such as the atomic bomb.
The willingness to sacrifice was most fiercely followed by the Japanese military
leadership. Contrary to what one may think, the emperor of Japan at the time, Emperor
Hirohito, was not in charge of the military decisions. He said that he “deeply opposed…
the military adventurism undertaken by the generals… who wielded the real
power(Trumbull).” The generals used the people’s loyalty towards the emperor to
motivate them. They used propaganda such as the phrase ,“the 100 million,” to show

4

their willingness to let a 100 million people embrace death for the emperor(Fisher). This
signified that Japan’s military leadership was willing to let an unimaginable amount of
lives be lost before they surrendered. The military leaders used and glorified the term
bushido, which had fallen out of use at the time, to justify and encourage these
behaviors of self-sacrifice. This tenet pervaded the Japanese culture, strengthening
their resolve against giving up. This continuous refusal to concede resulted in lowering
hopes of Japanese surrender in the American soldiers’ and, in turn, the American
generals’ minds.
The main reason: Numbers
A prime example of the refusal of Japanese surrender in adverse circumstances
is during the massive firebombings conducted by the US. The total deaths caused by
these bombings greatly exceeded the death toll of the 2 atomic bombs, with over
100,000 casualties in a two day span from March 9-10, 1945(Walker 27-28). By
comparison, the death toll of Hiroshima and Nagasaki combined are estimated to be
around 225,000(Yamazaki). While the bombings may not have been of the same
intensity, they had been ongoing for 6 months before Hiroshima. In these bombings,
around 350,000 civilians were killed(Mazanec 96). These statistics show that, if the
situation is considered from a utilitarian perspective where only the maximum number of
lives saved matters, the decision to use the atomic bombs was justified. Without the
push towards surrender that the atomic bombs, Fat Man and Little Boy, provided, the
war would have been prolonged and more people would have died in the extra months
and possible years of firebombing than how many died from the 2 atomic bombs.

5

The alternative plan to the usage of atomic power was Operation Downfall.
Operation Downfall was the planned land invasion of Japan and had predictions for
casualties on just the US’ side to be in the seven figures(Frank 340). US generals did
not want the war to drag on for too long and wanted a Japanese surrender within a
year, resulting in this plan. As the war dragged on, the casualties from the incessant
firebombings would continue so an end was needed. Continuing the utilitarian point of
view, 1,000,000 lives lost is much worse than 250,000 lives lost, and that’s not even
considering the inevitable Japanese toll. Furthermore, those 250,000 would be
Japanese casualties rather than US casualties which is a massive plus from Truman’s
point of view. However, these casualty predictions in the 7 figures were simply
predictions. They could have been exaggerated in order for the US to justify themselves
as it is the winner who gets to write the history books. To combat this suspicion, one
can look at the preparations Japan made to face the seemingly inevitable land invasion.
"These militia units received regular combat training with whatever weapons
could be scrounged while continuing to perform their agricultural and industrial
duties unless directed to other tasks, such as building defensive works, by area
commanders. Some 28 million Japanese fell under the provisions of the law in
addition to the 1.3 million civilians already working for the Navy and 2.25 million
for the Army."(Giangreco 122)
This horde that Japan was preparing implies the number of casualties they were
expecting and willing to have. The death pile would easily reach the millions if Operation

6

Downfall was seen through, so drastic action was needed to avoid this horrifying
possibility.
Another factor that contributes to the utilitarian argument of saving the most lives
are the actions of the Soviet Union. There were 2 reasons why it would not be ideal if
the Soviet Union entered the war. First, the US did not want to support communism. If
the Soviet Union ended up participating in the battle against Japan, then the US would
have to give the Soviet Union much territory due to the agreement made at the Yalta
Conference. This territory included a part of Poland and some smaller islands in the
Pacific(Berthan and Potts 285). The Soviet Union had already gained much territory in
Europe and if they got themselves even more land there, they would become even
more threatening. The Soviet Union had allied with Germany in the past and so
naturally, the US could not let an opposing viewpoint gain power. The second, more
utilitarian, justification was that more lives were predicted to be lost from the Soviet
Union’s invasion of northern Japan than the combined amount of deaths from the
atomic bombs(Frank 133). According to those predictions, the decision saved Japanese
and US lives. Furthermore, as the war dragged on, Japan and the US were not the only
countries continuously suffering casualties.
Other countries in the pacific such as China, Vietnam, and Java had significant
increasing casualties as the war progressed. For example, the Japan-induced
vietnamese famine of 1945 led to anywhere between 1-2 million deaths(Gunn).
"For China alone, depending upon what number one chooses for overall Chinese
casualties, in each of the ninety-seven months between July 1937 and August

7

1945, somewhere between 100,000 and 200,000 persons perished, the vast
majority of them noncombatants. For the other Asian states alone, the average
probably ranged in the tens of thousands per month, but the actual numbers
were almost certainly greater in 1945, notably due to the mass death in a famine
in Vietnam."(Frank 163)
Looking at these numbers, if the war was lengthened by even a month, then the number
of lives lost in total during that month would equal the deaths caused by the atomic
bombs combined. An argument is made that terrorism by directly harming civilians is
never justified. However, this rebuttal does not consider the circumstances of the unique
situation. First, despite the massive casualties caused by the bombs, the shortening of
the war resulted in overall civilian lives being saved as evidenced by the long quote
above. Second, a civilian life is worth the same as a soldier’s life. Both have a family,
loved ones, people they want to care for and see again so it is not possible to put one
over the other. An example of this in history was the cracking of the enigma machine
where the allies could only act upon the code they cracked once, because then the
Nazi’s would know the code was cracked and they would change it. So, in order to save
the greatest number of lives, a message that indicated a ship full of civilians was going
to get bombed was not acted upon. They instead waited for a message that would be a
vital turning point in the war. They had to sacrifice the few to save the many and protect
the nation.

8

The Alternative
One alternative to bombing a city was to have a demonstration instead to make
the Japanese surrender out of fear or xenophobia at this new unknown threat. However,
there was a limited supply of the bombs: only 2 were available in August 1945 with a
3rd on the way in September(Hasegawa). If the demonstration turned out to fail, which
was a very real possibility due to the limited research done, there would not be enough
bombs to convince the Japanese to surrender. What had provoked Emperor Hirohito to
stop being a puppet and start advocating for surrender was the atomic bomb usage at
Hiroshima. Only after that did he accept the US’ conditions of unconditional surrender
with the Potsdam Declaration.
The potential consequences of not dropping the bombs can be sobering. It is
very easy to take a moral high ground against the bombs by citing the suffering that the
Japanese involved went through and are still experiencing. But this argument
conveniently ignores the horrors of conventional warfare, which cannot be argued to be
any less than those of the atom bomb. Especially so when facing an opponent who
fears dishonor above death. A major cause of this rampant fear was Japanese
propaganda that was spread by its soldiers(Straus). American soldiers were widely
depicted as devils who would rape and kill every civilian they came across, when in
reality, they would take POW’s and treat them very well. The contrast between
propaganda and reality was such a shock that a significant number of the fear stricken
captured Japanese offered up information to the Americans. However, the vast majority
of Japanese soldiers did not get to experience this and put up a vicious fight. They went

9

to the lengths of using “civilians as human shields”(Silvam). Dishonor fearing Japanese
women would be given a grenade and told to throw themselves at the enemy(Silvam).
These are the conditions that American soldiers along with the Japanese soldiers and
civilians would have to face each day that the war continued. These different types of
suffering cannot be compared or put above the others and needed to be ended as soon
as possible.
One viewpoint is that the primary cause of Japanese surrender was not the
atomic bombings. Rather, it was the cancellation of expected support from the Soviet
Union. The two countries had a peace pact that was supposed to stay in effect till 1946
and the Soviet Union had assured Japan that it would be upheld. However, the Soviet
Union strongly desired the rewards that were promised for their participation by America
and Britain at the Yalta and Tehran conferences. In pursuit of this reward, the Soviet
Union invaded Japan without warning right after the first atomic bomb was dropped. So,
a possible middle ground would have been to refrain from dropping the second bomb
while waiting for a Japanese surrender as they realized that no help was coming. This
may be true but the biggest variable in this train of thought is: What if Japan did not
surrender following Hiroshima? This would result in the massive precedent of no
nuclear warfare being broken for no gain. One would fear that it would normalise
nuclear weapon usage as just another bomb. If the war was continued despite the
usage of an atomic bomb, it could come to be seen as simply another normal weapon of
war rather than a horror that shouldn’t be used again. After the first bomb was dropped,
Truman was encouraged by some to use all the bombs at his disposal on the Japanese.

10

However, Truman did not want to wipe “out whole populations because of the
pigheadedness of the leaders… unless absolutely necessary”(Walker). Truman did not
enjoy having to make this unenviable decision but it was the safest option at the time. It
can be argued that the bombing of Nagasaki was unnecessary but, considering the
stubbornness shown by the Japan military and civilians leading up to this point, the
potential consequences otherwise are too devastating.
Another aspect to consider is President Truman’s position in all of this. He had to
carry the weight of every dead American soldier on his shoulders. In addition, as soon
as Truman became president, he was informed of the secret Manhattan project which
would end up costing more than 23 billion dollars(CBTO). With the knowledge that so
much taxpayer money was spent in secret to research a weapon, one would hope that
the weapon would be useful in the war.
The advantages were plentiful from Truman’s perspective. By using the bomb,
any guilt of deceiving the US people would prove to be worth it and the war would
instantly end. The US would not have to proceed with Operation Downfall and conduct a
disastrous land invasion of Japan. Truman himself had been a soldier and fought in
WW1 so he knew what the soldiers were going through on a personal level for each day
that the war was prolonged(NPS). People who have not experienced the terrors of war
personally do not have the necessary lens to be able to provide or fully understand the
different perspectives in this war. If a person was given a button with which a war could
be instantly ended, and his brothers in the military saved, then he would have no
hesitation in pressing that button. It would actually be an obligation to press that button.

11

Truman’s Secretary of War, Mr. Stimson, also was ‘in accord’ and agreed that the
“atomic bomb… can be made the most useful”(Truman, 1945). Truman did not make
this decision alone and had the backing of other military servicemen which shows it was
not a rash call.
The potential regrets of choosing to not use atomic power are huge as well. If it
was found, after a bloody land invasion, that those millions of lives lost could have been
saved with the ease of pressing a button, how would everyone involved feel? They
would not be feeling the joy of maintaining a non-nuclear weapon precedent and would
perhaps question the president who let their loved ones perish severely. The US
citizens would be angry that their billions of dollars had been wasted on a weapon that
wasn’t used at the perfect time. Truman had resisted the seductive power of the bomb
but at what cost? Wars are fought for benefits and one cannot rejoice at the rewards of
a surrender while thinking of the many that died for it.
In fact, the showing off of the destructive nuclear power that a nuclear bomb
contains could serve as a deterrent for another world war. Other countries had also
started their own nuclear program and now that this power had been demonstrated,
countries would be much less willing to go to war and potentially create a World War 3.
Everyone knows very well that with the destructive power of the atomic bomb, it would
certainly lead to the destruction of the world if countries launched nukes against each
other. It would be a mutually assured destruction. After WW2, the cold war period had
times of great tension, with the peak being during the Cuban Missile Crisis where
nuclear warheads were almost launched, but the world got through it without any firing

12

of nukes. This can be credited at least in part to the previous destruction at Hiroshima
and Nagasaki. Perhaps if only a demonstration had been conducted, the world would
not know of the various effects of the atomic bomb(notably the horrid effects of radiation
in the human body) and would take a nuclear war more lightly.
Conclusion
Due to the dim hope of Japanese surrender and the amount of lives the dropping
of the atomic bombs saved, the usage of the nukes was justified. This thinking of the
dead as statistics and comparing the numbers is a callous, utilitarian viewpoint.
However, the only way to dispute it is to claim that one is smarter than the generals at
the time and would have calculated differently than them given the same data. There
was a possibility of letting the Soviet betrayal lead to a Japanese surrender but with the
knowledge and technology of the time, coordinating with the Soviets effectively can not
be expected of Truman and his administration. The usage of the atomic bomb can be
seen as both setting a precedent for nuclear weapons and as providing an example of
something that the future generations must not use. Ideally, the war would’ve ended
without the help of the atomic bomb but that can only be easily said now. At the time,
there were numerous factors of which many are still unknown to us or are only known to
those who have the privilege to look back and examine all the decisions. This debate of
justification will continue, in no small part thanks to Truman keeping this country free.

13

Bibliography
Berthon, Simon, and Joanna Potts. ​Warlords: An Extraordinary Re-creation of World
War II through the Eyes and Minds of Hitler, Churchill, Roosev.​ Da Capo P,
2007.
CBTO. "Manhattan Project: CTBTO Preparatory Commission." Home: CTBTO
Preparatory Commission,
www.ctbto.org/nuclear-testing/history-of-nuclear-testing/manhattan-project/#:~:te
xt=The%20scientific%20research%20was%20directed,23%20billion%20in%2020
07%20dollars).
Fisher, Max. "The Emperor's Speech: 67 Years Ago, Hirohito Transformed Japan
Forever." The Atlantic, History Extra, 15 Aug. 2012,
www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2012/08/the-emperors-speech-67-year
s-ago-hirohito-transformed-japan-forever/261166/.
Frank, Richard B. ​Downfall: The End of the Imperial Japanese Empire​. Random House,
1999.
Giangreco, D. M. ​Hell to Pay: Operation Downfall and the Invasion of Japan, 1945-47.
Naval Institute P, 2009.
Gunn, Geoffrey. "The Great Vietnamese Famine of 1944-45 Revisited." ​The
Asia-Pacific Journal​, vol. 9, no. 4, 2011.
Hasegawa, Tsuyoshi. "The Soviet Factor in Ending the Pacific War." NCEEER, 28 Oct.
2003.
Jones, Vincent C. ​Manhattan, the Army and the Atomic Bomb​. Center of Military
History, U.S. Army, 1985.
Kirkendall, Richard Stewart. ​Harry's Farewell Interpreting and Teaching the Truman
Presidency​. University of Missouri Press, 2004.
Mazanec, Brian M.. ​The Evolution of Cyber War: International Norms for
Emerging-Technology Weapons.​ Potomac Books, an Imprint of the University of
Nebraska Press., 2015.

14

Nitobe, Inazo. ​Bushido, the Soul of Japan: an Exposition of Japanese Though​t. 13th
ed., Bibliolife, Llc, 2009.
NPS. "Captain Harry Truman (U.S. National Park Service)." NPS.gov (U.S. National
Park Service), National Park Service, 30 Oct. 2018,
www.nps.gov/articles/captain-harry-truman.htm.
Ohnuki-Tierney, Emiko.​ Kamikaze Diaries: Reflections of Japanese Student Soldiers.​
University of Chicago Press, 2007.
Powers, David. “History - World Wars: Japan: No Surrender in World War Two.” BBC,
BBC, 17 Feb. 2011,
www.bbc.co.uk/history/worldwars/wwtwo/japan_no_surrender_01.shtml.
Silvam, Prabhu. "‘Worse Than Death’: I Survived the Battle for Okinawa." South China
Morning Post, 6 May 2018,
www.scmp.com/week-asia/society/article/2144267/worse-death-children-who-sur
vived-battle-okinawa.
Straus, Ulrich. ​The Anguish of Surrender: Japanese POW's of World War II​. University
of Washington Press, 2016.
Trumbull, Robert. “A Leader Who Took Japan to War, to Surrender, and Finally to
Peace.” The New York Times, 7 Jan. 1989, p. 6.
United States, Congress, Truman, Harry. Diary Entry of Harry Truman, July 25, 1945,
Harry S. Truman Library, 2011.
Walker, J. S. Prompt and Utter destruction: Truman and the use of atomic bombs
against Japan. University of North Carolina Press, 2005.
Wilson, William S, and Gregory Lee. Ideals of the Samurai: Writings of Japanese
Warriors. , 1982. Print.
Yamazaki, James N. ​Hiroshima and Nagasaki Death Toll​, 10 Oct. 2007,
www.aasc.ucla.edu/cab/200708230009.html.

15

TO WHAT EXTENT DID THE BUILD-UP AND EFFECTS OF THE SECOND WAR OF
ITALIAN UNIFICATION HELP PRUSSIA’S ABILITY TO SUCCESSFULLY
UNIFY THE GERMAN STATES?

Group 3: History

Word Count: 3,887

i
Table of Contents
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 1
Cavour’s Diplomatic Isolation of Austria.......................................................................... 2
The Loss of Austria’s prestige and the rise of Prussian power………............................. 6
Military Reforms and Bismarck’s growth of power........................................................... 9
Conclusion………………………………………............................................................... 12
Appendix: Timeline of Italian and German Unification…………………………………… 14
Works Cited................................................................................................................... 15

1
I.

Introduction
Otto von Bismarck, the great Prussian minister-president and first German

chancellor, once said that “fools learn from experience. I prefer to learn from the
experience of others.” It was not clear then how Bismarck’s greatest achievement,
uniting the German states, was related to his famous saying, but decades later, it’s
symbol of the historical relationship between the German and Italian unification
movements. Both the Germans and Italians, once divided between many disparate
states, unified to become major European powers. In particular, Germany’s unification is
regarded as the biggest European event in the second half of the 20th century, and for
years, historians have compared both German and Italian unifications as parallel and
epochal movements.
However, few to no historians have analyzed whether one movement influenced
the other. It is a subject worth exploring: the key war that unified most of Italy, the
Second War of Italian Unification (1859), ended only 5 years before the beginning of the
first war of German unification, the Second Schleswig war, and Prussia’s main rival,
Austria, was also involved in the Italian war. Along with that, investigating the
relationship between both unification movements not only provides a greater picture of
the geopolitical situation of Europe in the second half of the 20th century but also can
provide insight into the effects of unifying an ethnicity under one country in the modern
day. Thus, it is imperative to ask the question: to what extent did the build-up and
effects of the Second War of the Italian Unification help Prussia’s ability to successfully
unify the German states?

2
To answer this question, one must first understand, in detail, the entire unification
history of Germany and Italy, including its causes and the countries involved. Moreover,
one has to look into the political situation before, during, and after the conflicts, including
other related conflicts (such as the Crimean war). This investigation requires primary
sources from leaders of the movements as well as retrospective analysis from
experienced historians such as Dennis Showalter, Jonathan Steinberg, and Brendan
Simms.
For this investigation, three main cause-effect relationships will be discussed.
First, the method by which Camillo Benso count di Cavour, prime minister of PiedmontSardinia, conducted diplomacy with other European powers that led to Austrian
diplomatic isolation will be analyzed. Second, how Austrian failures in the Italian War of
1859 affected their status among German states will be investigated. Finally, the effects
of Prussia’s failure to mobilize during the Second War of Italian Independence will be
evaluated to see how it affected future Prussian military reform.
II.

Cavour’s Diplomatic Isolation of Austria
Whether Prime Minister Cavour was in favor of the Italian independence

movement or not, he was obligated to advance Piedmont as the most powerful Italian
state to unite the region. To achieve these goals, he looked toward two of his
predecessors for guidance: Prime Minister Cesare Balbo and Massimo d'Azeglio, who
both “wished to free Italy from Austria'' and unite Italy under Piedmont by seeking
”French or English help or preferably both” (Darby 50). A conflict against the Austrians
was not possible without either of the countries’ support. The issue was that both
countries still preferred Austria to Piedmont in most geopolitical matters. Even though

3
Napoleon III expressed his support for the Italian cause, it was clear that he put “French
interests and that of his family before anything else'' (Darby 50), and campaigning for
Italian unification would pose a threat to their relationship with Austria. “For [George
Villiers, 4th Earl of] Clarendon,” the prime minister of the UK at the time, “the Italian
Question was always a secondary consideration; in 1854, it was secondary to the need
to defeat Russia, a need which involved securing the cooperation of Austria.” (Hearder
120) It seemed that geopolitically Piedmont was at a disadvantage.
Cavour was well-aware that it was going to be a hindrance to his goals, and he
had to somehow draw in support for Italian unification among the great powers of
Europe. His solution was joining the British-French side of the Crimean War. He hoped
that Piedmont’s involvement would give Piedmont stronger political relationships with
European powers. In the beginning of the war effort however, both the UK and France
preferred the Austrians over the Italians. “In December 1854, Napoleon III had promised
Vienna that he would guarantee her Italian possessions if Austria took the western
side.” (Darby 50) Luckily, Austria’s neutrality in the conflict gave Cavour a golden
opportunity to turn the tides in his favor, and the Italian Unification movement gained
support from the UK public and Napoleon III. Piedmont was even given “an equal
status” (Darby 52) at the peace conference in Paris (1856). Cavour took advantage of
the event to advocate for the Italian cause, increasing the reputation of Piedmont as the
leader of Italy and providing him with the climate he needed to prepare for unification.
This growing Italian threat, however, proved to be disastrous for the Austrian
dominance in Europe. First, they controlled a key region of Italy, Lombardy-Venetia, and
the growing independence movement would undermine their political power in Italy and

4
their political prestige, especially among the German states. If they cannot remain
influential enough to block the growth of Italy, how could they remain powerful enough
to lead the German unification movement? More importantly was the issue of Austrian
neutrality during the Crimean war. This risky political position in the war caused a
fracture in the Holy Alliance between Russia, Austria, and Prussia “because Russian
officials had fully expected firm Austrian support during the war”. Thus, when Russians
lost the war, it caused ”their resentment of Austria's position” to far exceed “any ill
feeling against their former enemies on the battlefield” (Cook 543). Neutrality also
meant that the French or British were no longer viable allies because, despite both
countries’ requests to join their side, the Austrians refused to help. Austria was now
isolated from the rest of Europe.
Cavour understood what was going on and took full advantage of the situation to
not only isolate Austria further but also turn the major powers towards Italian unification.
The UK generally had good relations with Piedmont at this time due to their valuable
“military contribution” (Hearder 835) towards the British during the Crimean war. This
led to the British “public sentiment” turning “strongly pro-Italian” (Simms 225), primarily
because British journals informed their citizens regarding European affairs by pushing
“European warfare into the spotlight of publicity to a degree previously unknown”
(Matthews 104). This growing public support was eventually reflected within the British
government, where their “opinion was increasingly convinced that a strong Italy would
be a more effective barrier to the French than the ramshackle Hapsburgs” (Simms 225).
Napoleon III, seeing how British relations with Piedmont had now grown, took the
opportunity to install French influence into the region by helping Piedmont free Northern

5
Italy from Austria. Both leaders planned their course of action at Plombieres conference,
a secret meeting where Piedmont and France allied and planned on how to remove
Austria from the region. They planned to give “Lombardy, Venetia, Parma, and Modena”
to Piedmont in order to form “a kingdom of Upper Italy” while converting the Italian
region into a loose confederacy. France was now in full support of a united Italy. Cavour
also took advantage of Russian anger at the Austrians by shifting their position of Italian
unification. Napoleon III secured a “secret Franco-Russian treaty” (Simms 225) to have
the Russians agree to the changes in Italy. Ultimately, Cavour had successfully turned
all of the European powers against Austria and in favor of Italian unification.
The diplomatic isolation of Austria had a great impact on Prussia’s ability to unify
Germany later on. Austria, without external support, simply could not match the might of
the Prussian military during the Austro-Prussian war (1866). Prussia emphasized
“planning and organization, education and analysis” (Showalter 28) in their military and
arguably possessed Europe’s most powerful military, meanwhile Austria’s suffered from
using up their “moral and physical resources” during the Napoleonic wars, numerous
“cost overruns”, and “the limited forms of planning and preparing” for “future campaigns”
(Showalter 21-22). Austria was also behind technologically, using “outmoded shock
tactics” and “old-fashioned guns” (Holborn 166) in warfare. The Prussians could also
mobilize faster than the Austrians because Prussia “could use five railway lines of
different companies to bring his armies, totaling 280,000 men, to the front in Saxony
and Bohemia in five days. In contrast, the Austrians had only one railway line available
to transport 210,000 men to the front.” (Grant and Veenendaal 18) In this critical
German unification conflict, Austria needed an ally to support their army, but Cavour

6
and his movement successfully turned the UK, France, and Russia against the
Austrians. Cavour’s involvement in the Crimean war, relations with Napoleon III, and
goodwill they had earned with both the UK and France successfully turned Europe away
from the Austrians, and this isolation led to them ultimately losing the war against
Prussia. Without any other power to defeat besides the relatively weak Austrians, the
Prussians were empowered by Cavour and the Italian independence movement.
III.

The Loss of Austria’s prestige and the rise of Prussian power
Austria was left without allies among the biggest powers of Europe, but at the

very least, they maintained some prestige among German states (particularly in the
South) and were recognized as one of the two leaders of the German states alongside
Prussia. However, the Second War of Italian Independence had not begun, and the
steps Cavour took to aggravate and weaken the Austrians ultimately allowed Prussia to
position themselves as the leading German state, laying the foundation for Bismarck’s
unification of Germany.
In Plombieres conference in July of 1858, Cavour and Napoleon III agreed that
the only way that the plan to wage a war against Austria would work is if “Italy” was “the
victim and Austria” was “the aggressor” (Riall 165). Thus, they had to take specific
actions that would prompt the Austrians to declare war. To do this, they used two
primary methods. Firstly, Piedmont made a “series of inflammatory remarks” to
aggravate them, such as Victor Emmanuel II’s “opening of parliament” speech “in Turin”
(Riall 164-165). Secondly, Piedmont began to rapidly build up their military power. Both
of these provoked Vienna to issue an “ultimatum in April 1859 demanding that Piedmont
cease military preparations” (Simms 226). This strategy that Cavour and Napoleon III

7
employed was successful in inciting the Austrians to provoke the war, and this ultimately
impacted Prussia and the wars of the German unification in two key ways. First, it made
Austria look like reckless aggressors in the eyes of other European powers, which led to
them losing the “valuable goodwill in Europe,” (Simms 226) and European powers like
the UK and Russia were less willing to provide support to the Austrians. This greatly
hurt them in the Austro-Prussian war, when they desperately needed military support
from another power to stand up to the Prussian military. Second, this panicked the
German Confederation members because they realized that if Austria ruled and unified
Germany, they would constantly be dragged into wars “on account of Habsburg
ambitions” (Simms 226) in places like Italy. The Prussians seemed like a better
alternative for Germans because the Hohenzollerns, German dynasty that ruled
Prussia, were limited to German states and didn’t have as many rivalries as the
Habsburgs. Because of these factors, many German states were more willing to side
with Prussia than with Austria during the wars of German unification.
The actual battles of the Second War of Italian Unification proved to be
disastrous for the Austrians. Piedmont, with French support, proved to be a formidable
opponent to the Austrians, and at the battle of Magenta, Austria was unable to maintain
their position in battle and had more than twice the casualties in the battle compared to
the French and Piedmontese armies, forcing them to “continue their retreat” (Schneid
51). The battle of Solferino was even worse for them, where their army had “no
systematic distribution of bread for three days” (Showalter 55), and when the fighting
began, they were attacked and “overrun by the French…At the end of the day, over
20,000 Austrians were dead, wounded, or missing.” (Showalter 56) These battles

8
severely “reduced Austrian prestige” among the German states. Not only did this
catastrophe reinforce the idea that Austria would force all of Germany into “alien
Hapsburg conflicts” but also that they were incapable of holding their own ground
militarily in those conflicts. This is what lead to the formation of German National
Association (a liberal organization wanting to unite Germany under a parliamentary
Prussian government) to “abolish the Confederation” and “transfer all political and
military powers to Prussia until” (Simms 227) unification was achieved, displaying the
lack of faith that national liberals had in the Austrians. This loss of support remained
even up to the wars of German unification and was a direct cause of Northern German
states being quick to unify with Prussia after the Austro-Prussian war. It also made
Southern German states not entirely opposed to siding with Prussia during and after the
Franco-Prussian war. Thus, this damage on Austria’s reputation helped Prussia unify
Germany under their government at a rapid pace in the 1860s.
For the Southern German states, the Second War of Italian Unification had major
effects on their view of Napoleon III’s France. Since the war “exposed the profound
military unpreparedness of Germany”, they felt that the French had humiliated them on
an international stage. French diplomat Adolphe de Bourqueney warned Napoleon III
that “We have restored to German opinion its antipathy for France” (Simms 227). Along
with that, many “German conservatives were horrified by revived French aggression”
(Riall 166) and feared that they would take advantage of nationalist movements to
spread their influences even further. These Southern (and even Northern) German
sentiments and fears were used by Bismarck to unite Germany in the final war of the
German wars of unification, the Franco-Prussian war, and it is unlikely that the Southern

9
German states would have fought on Prussia’s side without a public and government
anti-French sentiment. Thus, Cavour involving Napoleon III and their victory against
Austria gave Bismarck a valuable tool to unite the region during the Franco-Prussian
war.
IV.

Military Reforms and Bismarck’s growth of power
The German Confederation feared that the Second War of Italian Unification

would lead to a “complete Austrian collapse” (Simms 226) and asked Prussia to
intervene. Prussia wished to remain neutral in the war, seeing little benefit in entering a
conflict that would bring them little to no benefit. However, under this new pressure, they
were forced to begin mobilization. Prussian military buildup caused Napoleon III to
withdraw from the conflict, accelerating the end of the war, but it also exposed “the
military unpreparedness…of Prussia” (Simms 227) that led Prussia to make their army
stronger than ever before.
Helmuth von Moltke, chief of staff of the Prussian army, was surprised that “the
Prussian mobilization had failed”. What truly “stunned” Moltke was that even though
“war materials…had been collected and stocked all over Germany along three railway
lines”, “civilian traffic took precedence”. This led to Moltke reorganizing the General
Staff and improved Prussia’s ability to mobilize. The most important change was the
creation of “a railroad department” and “the second division of the General Staff, the
mobilization section” (Steinberg 154), which enabled the Prussian army to have greater
control of the railways and allowed for fewer delays or problems to occur when using
them.

10
This change was, by all means, enormous because it enabled “the Prussian
general staff” to perfect “a mobilization system based on the extensive use of railways
that enabled Prussia to mobilize and concentrate more men faster than either of its
main adversaries” during the wars of German unification. Prussia ran into problems
when mobilizing against Austria, but they still managed to outstrip Austria in military
planning and were able to quickly move “nearly 200,000 troops and 55,000 horses” to
the Bohemian border, a feat Austria could not have achieved with the same efficiency.
The effects of Prussia’s strong mobilization planning was even greater during the
Franco-Prussian war because even though “the French railways performed just as
efficiently as their Prussian counterparts,” they were not able to match Prussia because
of a “lack of adequate coordination and planning by the French government negated
France’s natural advantage in rail assets” (Jordan). Along with that, Prussia’s ability to
plan their mobilizations more effectively allowed for the army to be well organized into
“brigades, divisions, and corps” while France “improvised their order of battle upon
mobilization” (Walter 296). Both of these advantages over France is what ultimately lead
to Prussia’s victory over the generally confused French army in this war, and without the
victory in the Franco-Prussian war, it is unlikely that Bismarck would have been able to
unify Southern Germany with the North. Thus, without Moltke’s reorganization of the
Prussian army sparked by their failed mobilization during the Second War of Italian
Unification, it is unlikely Prussia would have had the edge in planning and railways that
they needed to withstand the Austro-Prussian and Franco-Prussian wars.
The military unpreparedness of Prussia during the Second War of Italian
Unification also sparked a critical debate over the size of the army. Moltke was shocked

11
that “only half of the corps were ready” (Steinberg 154) for the Italian war, which meant
that the army was effectively not using half of its eligible population due to “financial
constraints.” This limitation would be detrimental for the country if Prussia “sought to
ensure a more effective response to the next French challenge” (Simms 228) because
the Prussian army was simply too small to stand up against European powers, and the
gap had been widening for years. “Whereas in 1820 Prussia had 40,000 fewer soldiers
than France, the difference had now risen to 200,000, and similar discrepancies had
arisen elsewhere. Austria's army was much larger than that of Prussia, and Russia
could count about one million men in the ranks of its armed forces.” (Nipperdey 667) If
the size of the army was not expanded, it would be difficult to measure up to both
Austria and France during the wars of German unification.
Albrecht von Roon was the Prussian Minister of War during this time, and he had
a series of reforms to not only fix the problem of the army size but also improve the
army in other ways as well. The policies would increase “the size of the active army and
active reserves by more than 50 percent” and it would require “three years of active duty
to turn a civilian into a Prussian soldier” instead of two. These reforms were valued
greatly by the king because out “of the Hohenzollern monarchs after Frederick the
Great, William I was the most committed soldier” and felt that “the third year made a real
difference in creating the Soldatengeist, or ‘military spirit’.” However, the Prussian
parliament was opposed to the policies because it would raise “annual costs.”
(Steinberg 159-160) Wilhelm I was greatly disappointed by the conflict over the military
and considered abdicating the throne. The saving grace for both Roon and Wilhelm I
was Bismarck, who wanted to uphold the king’s wishes and was more loyal to him than

12
his own conservative party. Roon and Wilhelm I wanted to make Bismarck ministerpresident, and when “the conflict had reached the point where the only alternatives
available were Bismarck or the abdication of the king” (Walter 374), Wilhelm chose the
former.
Thus began Bismarck’s path to autocracy and eventually fulfilling the goals of the
king. Parliament was still opposed to passing a budget to allow for the expansion of the
army, so to solve the problem, “the government proceeded without one, collecting taxes
and expending funds according to the plans and programs of William and Bismarck.”
(Newland 80) Roon’s reforms were implemented, and Bismarck and his cabinet had the
power to reform the army and even give them more modern technology. This debate
and its resolution had immense effects on the wars of German unification. First, it
allowed for the expansion of the size of the army, giving Prussia a military prowess that
could match the French and Austrian armies. Second, it gave them greater freedom for
new army reforms, like the added third year and greater use of modern technology that
gave them superiority in competence and firepower. Finally, this military debate was the
key reason for making Bismarck the minister-president, and it is unlikely that the wars of
German unification would have been successful without Bismarck taking charge. Thus,
without the failure to mobilize during the Second War of Italian Unification, Prussia
wouldn’t have realized the issues with their army and fixed them, and without these
changes to their military, Germany unification would have been a much slower process.
V. Conclusion
So, the answer to the research question, “to what extent did the build-up and
effects of the Second War of Italian Unification help or hinder Prussia’s ability to

13
successfully unify the Germans?”, is clear to a great extent. For Prussia to unify the
Northern states, they had to defeat the Austrians, and to win the Austro-Prussian war, it
was imperative that no one would ally with Austria during the war and they had to
maintain their technological superiority. The damage to Austria’s reputation in the
Second War of Italian Unification, Cavour’s diplomatic “game” to isolate Austria and win
allies, and improvements in Prussian military organization and power all gave them the
edge they needed to win the war as fast as they did. The Franco-Prussian war was
critical in unifying the Southern German states, while the Second War of Italian
unification gave Germans a common enemy (France) and the military strength to defeat
them. Without this war, it is unlikely that the conditions would be in place for German
unification to take place.
Yet, there are limitations to this argument. Firstly, besides the effects on the
military of Prussia, the impacts of the war on unification were indirect. The damage to
Austria, for example, was often by conditions that Cavour and the movement created,
so it isn’t accurate to put most of the success of Prussia upon the Italians. Secondly,
there is no primary source proof of British and Russian abstention from the AustroPrussian war being caused by the tensions created post-Crimean War. Although it is not
necessary to have a direct link to make that point legitimate, it does make that point
harder to concretely prove. Nevertheless, the relation between both movements is clear,
and Bismarck and Cavour, despite the differences in obstacles, separately worked
towards a similar goal and consequently changed the course of European history.

14
Appendix: Timeline of Italian and German Unification
Event

Year

Crimean War

1854-1856

Plombieres Conference

July 1858

Austrian ultimatum to Piedmont; start of

April 19-23, 1859

Second War of Italian Unification
Battle of Magenta

June 4, 1859

Battle of Solferino

June 24, 1859

Armistice of Villafranca; end of Second

July 11, 1859

War of Italian Unification
Victor Emmanuel II crowned Victor

March 1861

Emmanuel I of Italy (Italy united excluding
Rome and Venetia)
Bismarck becomes Minister-President

September 1862

1st War of German Unification: Second

1864

Schleswig War
2nd War of German Unification: Austro-

1866

Prussian War
3rd War of German Unification: FrancoPrussian War

1870-1871

15
Works Cited
Charles River Editors. The Unification Of Germany. Ann Arbor, Charles River Editors,
2018.
Cook, Kathrine. “Russia, Austria, and the Question of Italy, 1859-1862.” The
International History Review, vol. 2, no. 4, 1980, pp. 542-565.
Darby, Graham. The Unification of Italy. Createspace Independent Pub, 2013.
Grant, H., and Augustus Veenendaal. Rails To The Front: The Role Of Railways In
Wartime. Rotterdam, Karwansaray Publishers, 2017.
Hearder, Harry. “Clarendon, Cavour, and the Intervention of Sardinia in the Crimean
War, 1853-1855.” The International History Review, vol. 18, no. 4, 1996, pp. 819836.
Holborn, Hajo. “Moltke's Strategical Concepts.” Military Affairs, vol. 6, no. 3, 1942, pp.
153-168.
Jordan, Jonathan. “Reign of Railroads.” The Quarterly Journal of Military History, vol.
17, no. 4, 2005.
Matthews, Joseph. Reporting The Wars. Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press,
1957.
Newland, Samuel. Victories Are Not Enough: Limitations of the German Way of War.
Carlisle, Strategic Studies Institute, 2005.
Nipperdey, Thomas. Germany from Napoleon to Bismarck. Princeton, Princeton
University Press, 1996.
Pichler, Rupert. “Economic Policy and Development in Austrian Lombardy, 1815–
1859.” Modern Italy, vol. 6, no. 1, 2001, pp. 35–58.

16
Riall, Lucy. Garibaldi. New Haven, Yale University Press, 2007.
Schneid, Frederick. The Second War of Italian Unification 1859-1861. Oxford, Osprey
Publishing Ltd, 2012.
Showalter, Dennis. The Wars of German Unification. London, Bloomsbury Academic,
2015.
Simms, Brendan. Europe: The Struggle For Supremacy. New York City, Basic Books,
2013.
Steinberg, Jonathan. Bismarck: A Life. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2013.
Walter, Dierk. “Roon, the Prussian Landwehr, and the Reorganization of 1859–1860.”
War In History, vol. 16, no. 3, 2009, pp. 269-297.

1

HOW DID THE KANSAS-NEBRASKA ACT IN 1854 LEAD TO
THE UNITED STATES CIVIL WAR?

Group 3: History

Word Count: 3,912

2

Table of Contents
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
North Economy

.......................................................4

South Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
After the Kansas-Nebraska Act: The Impact on Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Political Parties Before Kansas-Nebraska Act . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Political Parties After the Announcement of Kansas-Nebraska Act . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Values of This Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

i

3

How did the Kansas-Nebraska Act in 1854 Lead to the United States Civil War?
Background:
The peculiar institution of slavery had been a part of the identity that composed
the United States for many centuries following the Jamestown colony's founding in
Virginia back in 1619. For a long time, African slaves initially helped the English
colonies by spending long hours growing Tobacco under harsh conditions (Jason). Over
time, the role of the slave expanded. The majority served as field hands or house
servants, while a small group became preachers and were taught trades. Whites
allowed African slaves the opportunity to immerse themselves in Christianity in return
for their intense labor (Jason). In The New Testament, the release of slaves was not
condoned, and slaves are told to accept the whites as superior.
Without slavery, some could argue that it would have taken longer for everything
to come the way it is now since slaves sped up development. When the United States
expanded, slaves were usually pulled towards the South as the primary labor system
due to farming needs, unlike the North. Although the North had slaves, it was
unnecessary to have an abundant amount, unlike the South. The slaveowners of the
South saw that slaves provided economic benefits, status, and power, which would
quickly help them climb the social ranks, an ultimate reason for why they would want to
keep slavery. A higher social class gave access to decisions that were made for the
states. Even though there were not many slave owners, the more poor sector (the
majority) of the Souther social ladder believed that with slavery, they would never be at

2

the bottom since the slaves would always be below them. On the other hand, between
1780 and 1804, all Northern states, beginning with An Act for the Gradual Abolition of
Slavery from Pennslyvania in 1780, abolished the slave trade ("A New American Nation,
1776-1800"). This stark contrast on slavery beliefs has led to a division between the
North and the South and, ultimately, tensions of the Civil War. Slavery was further
challenged between the North and South upon the introduction of the Kansas Nebraska
Act. This paper aims to determine the impact of the Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 on
the start of the United States Civil War.
Introduction:
The Kansas-Nebraska Act, proposed by Stephen A. Douglass in January 1854, was
passed by congress on May 30, 1854. The Act split the land of the Louisiana Purchase
into two territories, Kansas and Nebraska, for settlement and used popular sovereignty
to decide whether or not the territories would contain slaves or not. Stephen A.
Douglass proposed this Act in hopes that it would lead to the building of a
transcontinental railroad that would pass through the North and his real estate (Rucker).
This railroad would open up to more expansion in the West. Douglas’ inspiration comes
from the manifest destiny quest from 1845 to expand the United States' land from sea to
shining sea ("Manifest Destiny"). If successful, it could boost the senator's ratings for
the presidency since he would follow the american dream of manifest American granting
him more supporters. This Act would break the Missouri Compromise of 1820, which
banned slavery north of the 36º 30' parallel because popular sovereignty could decide
that slavery is allowed in Nebraska, an area past the Missouri Compromise line. This

3

Missouri Compromise break infuriated the North since they were initially promised not to
have to deal with the fact that the land could be slave land due to the Missouri
Compromise. The South saw this Act as an opportunity to expand slavery. With these
different perspectives, it had played a role in contributing to the United States Civil War.
This paper aims to determine the impact of the Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854
concerning starting the United States Civil War from 1861 to 1865.
The resolution of the Civil War resulted in the deaths of over 600,000 men
(approximately 360,000 in the North and 258,000 in the South), ranking it to America’s
bloodiest conflict. The question ’How did the Kansas-Nebraska Act in 1854 lead to the
United States Civil War?’ must be considered to fully understand how much a role the
act contributed to such a bloody war. The history of the Civil War is extreme. Still, it is a
historical process that can be analyzed, studied, and explained. To investigate the
causes of a war of such destruction is interesting and even necessary because it can
create a better understanding of similar conflicts in other countries with the division
between two groups. Also, understanding the Act can give useful guidance on how to
avoid conflict in the future.
The investigation will look at the change of political parties before and after the act.
Other effects, such as the North and the South's economic change that resulted from
the Act, must be assessed to determine how the Act led to the Civil War.
Many American historians believe that the shattering of the political party and the
formation of the antislavery Republican party and the proslavery Democratic party is the
significant impact that led to the Civil War (Garrison). A Professor for History and

4

Political Science at Southeastern Louisiana University believes that the election of
Abraham Lincoln resulted from the Kansas Nebraska Act and caused the Civil War. The
election of Abraham Lincoln sparked the secession of the South and the Civil War
occurring. However, to look at the political standings is not enough. Other factors need
to be considered. The economic change in the North and South should be looked at
since the desire for wealth is a primary factor of most wars.
North Economy:
The economy of the North was heavily driven by the landscape which made daily
activities different compared to the South. In order to explain the North economy, the
landscape and climate must be explained as sources of income are dependent on
certain conditions of landscape and climate. The landscape determines what the people
can do since you must adjust the source of food, income, and water based on the
landscape. It can be far more difficult in harsh conditions for example.
According to historians, the climate of the north consisted of warm summers and cold
winters (Lee). The terrain consisted of “rocky soil [with a] harsh climate” (Heidler).
These conditions combined with the short growing season of the north made farming
unfavorable. Fortunately, there was an abundance of forests, allowing the northerners to
be involved in exporting built ships to the south (Cumo). Fall Line, a point where many
rivers plunged, consisted of many water falls. Cities typically populated the area around
these waterfalls and used the waterfalls as a source of energy (Benton-Short). The
geography of Fall Line adjacent to Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Virginia,
Maryland, Jersey, New Hampshire, and Pennsylvania played a critical role in

5

industrialization of the north to running many factories. The cities in these states
typically served as trading centers as a result (Benton-Short).
During the early to mid 19th century, there was a rapid growth of immigration into the
United States, raising the population from 5 million to 31 million (Bergquist). Majority of
the immigrants settled into the North, more specifically the Atlantic Coast, where Fall
Line was located with many trading centers. The increase in manufacturing and trade in
the North was the center of attention that drew laborers to work at. With the increase of
individuals, new business owners along with manufacturers brought in new ideas
(Kronenwetter). The produced goods in the North were traded for foreign products using
trading ships (Bergquist). To encourage Northern residents to purchase local products,
high tariffs were placed on outside goods ("Expansion and Reform, 1790-1850"). This
protected the industries from outside competition. During the beginning of the 19th
century also came the building of over 88,000 miles of roads and the success of
building canals such as the Erie Canal in New York allowed for the expansion of
commercial activities ("Industrializing America"). Many other cities followed suit, leading
to over 3,000 canals and 30,000 miles of tracks within the first half of the 1800s.
Despite the fact that there was little farmland, many inventions such as the automatic
reaper sped up the harvesting of crops by over 50% (Marshall).
Based on the evidence provided by historians, the North had a self-sufficient society
without needing to rely on imports for food or materias - the North was able to both
sustain an industrialized society with high export rates. The massive growth in

6

population supports this analysis since immigrants saw opportunities up North for jobs
and a better life.
South Economy:
Meanwhile in the South, the stark difference of the atmosphere of agriculture
contradicted the North; they had a warm and sunny climate with lots of rainfall, with mild
winters (McGuire). The climate was perfect for agriculture since the farming season.
Geographically, the Atlantic Ocean and the Gulf of Mexico borders the Southeast,
providing rich and fertile soil along with shipping ports (Schuleten). With a population of
only 12 million (one third were slaves), agriculture was the main focus of the source of
income for the majority of these non-slave people. As a result, industries and towns
developed at a far slower pace compared to the north. Inventions such as the cotton gin
in 1793 had developed the cotton industry in the South, exponentially increasing the
amount of cotton produced over time ("Cotton Gin"). Eventually it had made up two third
of the exports of the South.
One of the major assets of the South economy was the implementation of the Fugitive
Slave Act in 1850. The Act was stringent, and used lots of money in order to prevent the
escape of slaves. To guarantee that a slave would not escape the South, they would
“summon not only the territorial militia but also the federal troops” to safely transfer the
slaves (Holst 252). Despite losing massive amounts of money to deliver a single slave
over to his master, the States followed with the Fugitive Slave Act. Doing outside
research, 100 dollars in 1850 is worth approximately $3100 in 2017, according to
Official Data. Converting the money it required in 1850 to retrieve a runaway slave was

7

approximately three million dollars. The upside of this Fugitive Slave Act is that it
“lowered the standard of proof for slave owners to seize African Americans in the North
and send them into slavery in the South” (ABC-Clio). This proves that the South was
willing to stick to tradition, and keep slavery no matter the cost.
Based on the evidence gathered it seems like the North was advancing at a far faster
rate compared to the South. The fact that the South has a major asset just to maintain
the peculiar institution of slavery significantly reduces their overall income. Despite this,
there was no evidence that the South aspired for a higher economical status than the
North; they were more concerned with holding slavery in place.
After the Kansas-Nebraska Act - The Impact on Economy:
The Kansas Nebraska Act provided opportunities to both sides of the spectrum to
possibly improve their economical stance. Kansas and Nebraska, both located in the
Great Plains, meant that they shared similar characteristics, mainly climate
(Fenneman). Droughts typically were expected for at least thirty-five consecutive days
annually with a devastating sixty to seventy day drought once a decade (Wishart).
Historians claim that at the time of the Kansas Nebraska Act, the “topography and
climate in the Great Plains would not be conducive to cash crop cultivation” (University
of Nebraska, 139). Furthermore, Native Americans and European settlers were
confronted with this constant drought between 1439 and 1468 when Upper Republican
people had to abandon their villages in the Central Great Plains (Wilson). Compared to
other regions, the Great Plains lacked trees, meaning that there was a sparse supply of
timber (Sharp). Despite the fact that Nebraska and Nebraska are landlocked states,

8

these states consist of many rivers compared to other states in the United States. As a
result, the rivers in the Kansas and Nebraska areas can be utilized for fuel for
manufacturing.
Based upon the evidence presented, it seems that the North would benefit from this
land since it is consistent with their base of economy - manufacturing. The South with a
more agricultural based economy would have a hard time using the land for their
benefits.
Although Kansas and Nebraska eventually entered as a free state, the fight for Kansas
was not easy, since it was bordered by both free and slave states. On the other hand,
Nebraska is surrounded by free states, which made it easy to acquire for the North.
Understanding the location of Nebraska in relation to the South, it was clearly
impossible for the South to have brought a large army of people up there. There was a
large influx of slave owners who went past the Missouri border into Kansas to secure
the best possible land for cash crop cultivation (even though there was little). According
to historians, there were “steady streams of killings, robberies, and other forms of
violence between the two factions” for the sole purpose of acquiring land ("Bleeding
Kansas"). These cash crop cultivation lands stood until John Brown, an abolitionist
radical leader, along with his antislavery settlers outnumbered the proslavery emigrants
in 1861 (Rucker). This long lasting fight over the territory of Kansas, was known as
Bleeding Kansas, was significant. Despite the fact that the lands were unfavorable for
the South in terms of economy, the will of the slave-owning aristocracy favored
expansion of slavery. This shows that the South didn’t care about the economical

9

expansion that could result from Kansas, but they had the sole purpose of expanding
their beliefs.
It was only after gold was found in Wyoming, Nebraska in 1859 that more people
rushed into Nebraska ("Bleeding Kansas”). The cities that surround the Missouri River
became important points for goods to be carried up the river to trading posts and Army
forts in the mountains ("Bleeding Kansas”). Given that there are army forts in the
mountains here, it provides more power for the North since they could also train armies
there. Nebraska economically solidified the Northern United States in how it can
function itself without the help of imports or exports.
Based upon the evidence, we can say that the economical differences didn’t bother the
South for the start of the civil war. They were angered at the fact that they couldnt
expand slavery. Instead of a battle of economical differences, there was growing
sectionalism between the North and the South.
To further explain the impacts of the Act, it is necessary to look into the change of the
political parties due to the implementation of the Act, and look at how the beliefs of the
people have changed and what people did in order to prevent or expand slavery.
Political Parties Before Kansas-Nebraska Act:
The political parties in the United States before the Kansas-Nebraska Act in the North
were the Whig Party and the Democrats (Rucker). In 1830, these parties mainly
disagreed about economic policies - the Whigs wanted accelerated economic growth
where the government would endorse projects. In contrast, the Democrats wanted the
federal government to not interfere with the economy (Corbett). At the time, the Whigs

10

were wealthy urban northerners and wealthy planters in the South (Corbett). Democrats
saw themselves as defenders of the ordinary people against the elite. The
Mexican-American War and the introduction of the Wilmont Proviso escalated the
question of slavery. The Wilmont Proviso, which banned slavery in Mexico’s land, was
disliked by many slaveowners in the South (“Wilmot Proviso (1846)”). According to
historians, there were disagreements within the Democrat party in 1848 after the
Mexican-American War when considering the expansion of slavery (“Free Soil Party”).
Northerners believed that “extending slavery into the West would threaten the
development of that region” (“Free Soil Party''). On the other hand, the southerners
advocated for slave labor. The Democrats split up: the southerners stayed, while the
northerners made a new party, the Free Soil Party. The Free Soil Party believed in “free
soil, free speech, free labor, and free men'' (Poer). Along with the old northern
Democrats, few men from the Northern Whigs and the Liberty Party joined (Poer). The
Free Soilers opposed slavery expansion into new territories but believed no one could
stop slavery in the South. In the early 1850s, slavery challenged the unity of the Whig
Party. As a temporary solution, the Compromise of 1850 from Henry Clay kept the party
intact. However, the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 eventually began the Whig Party’s
division (Holst 251). The Northerners disagreed with how much dedication the
Southerners put towards bringing back runaway slaves. As described earlier, few of
these northern men left for the Free Soiler party.
By looking at a member’s opinion from the political parties, we can better understand
how the common man or women felt. A Free Soiler’s opinion and a Democratic

11

Southerner would be the best types of people to look at since they would give a general
view of the people in the North and South, respectively. Suppose we were to look at a
political leader’s perspective on slavery. In that case, their opinion will be very biased
towards their political party beliefs. If they are not, it can create a bad image for their
party and ultimately discourage people from warning them to join. A commoner will still
have bias involved, but not comparable to a political leader.
A Free Soiler, Angelina E. Grimké, from New York, gave her perspective on the United
States before the Kansas-Nebraska Act was announced (McClymer). She provided a
metaphor where she related the anti-slavery ideologies to that of Martha taking the
stone away and uncovering Lazarus’s body (McClymer). The relationship is that by
taking away the stone (the slavery bond), then slaves can see the “pure light of heaven”
(McClymer). By using a metaphor to popular religion, Christianity, most people can
connect with what Grimké says. Grimké does not discredit the South for slavery,
surprisingly, even though this opinion from a Free Soiler may be biased towards the
Free Soiler party since a newspaper printed her explanation. To balance this out, we will
need to look at a Democratic Southerner. Despite this potential bias, the opinion is
valuable since it shows that the North did not negatively feel for the South on slavery.
A Democratic Southerner from Mississippi gave his perspective of the tension between
the North and South before the Kansas - Nebraska Act. He states how the North has
always been in control of the South while the South has been all “calmness and
equanimity.” This argument proves that there has already been signs of division
between the North and South before the Kansas-Nebraska Act. By trying to make the

12

South seem better with basic, short sentences and the North look worse with long,
targeting sentences, the Southerner shows his hatred towards the North, while making
his region look peaceful. This argument is that this argument was found in the journal of
a Southern Democrat, which proves that there is significantly less bias. This opinion
unfortunately, might not be representative of many people. Despite this, the argument
provides a perspective of a member of the Democratic party.
Taking in the North and South’s political beliefs before the Kansas Nebraska Act went
into analysis, it seems that there is already evidence that there is a division between the
North and South developing. Furthermore, there was no tension of a war between the
North and South at this time because the North wasn’t mindful of the South, but didn’t
agree with their ideology. There is not that much of a divide between the two states
based on the textual evidence that was just presented, it’s only the South who has an
issue with the North.
Political Parties After the Announcement of Kansas-Nebraska Act:
Along with the Whig Party already declining, the Kansas-Nebraska Act was the last Act
that completely wiped the party. The Kansas-Nebraska Act attracted attention to the
Republican Party, specifically the northern Whigs, members of the Free Soil Party, and
assorted abolitionists. The Republican Party aimed to prevent the spread of slavery
beyond where it exists. On the other hand, the Southern Whig Party joined with the
Southern Democratic Party to make the Democratic Party (Rucker). The Democratic
Party promoted slavery expansion into the West. To explore the effects of the
Kansas-Nebraska Act, it is necessary to look at primary sources that detail what

13

occurred during voting, especially when there are two sides with completely different
views and when these sides will show violence to get what they want.
On March 30, 1855, there was a reelection in the Kansas territory for deciding slavery
where the sacking of the town of Lawrence occurred. In the sacking, Thomas H.
Gladstone witnessed the sack firsthand. He describes that the Democrat delegation, led
by Deputy Marshall Fain, attacked the newspaper offices. Gladstone describes with
great detail how each "case [were] broken to piece[s]." By being descriptive in how the
pro-slavery attacked, Gladstone wants the reader to feel the horror that Gladstone had
felt himself when the event occurred. A limitation of this recount of the event is that
there could be potential bias within the descriptions of the pro-slavery delegation
because Gladstone could be overreacting. Despite this, this event showcases the
violence that comes from these political parties to prevent the expansion of free states.
Based on the evidence gathered, there is extensive proof that the sectionalism between
the two sides is rising more and can cause a Civil War. With people reserving to
violence to make a point on slavery can cause further revenge and ultimately start a
war. People dying over a political cause proved that both sides' motive is to eliminate
the other side's ideas, which is proof of further sectionalism. In the 1860 presidential
election, the South's hate for Republicans was so high that they didn't even show
Abraham Lincoln's name in the ballots in the South. The South uniting due to the
Kansas Nebraska Act led to the South trying to limit the number of people voting for
him.
Conclusion:

14

After examining the impact of the Kansas-Nebraska Act on the start of the United States
Civil War, the investigation concludes that the desire to grow economically was not an
important cause, but rather the change of political parties. The Whig party and the Free
Soiler Party declined and split up into the proslavery Democratic Party, represented
mainly by the South, and the anti-slavery Republican Party, which was characterized
primarily by the North. Along with the growing sectionalism between the North and
South, the violence that arose with the Kansas-Nebraska Act further increased the
division to lead to the Civil War. The South’s unification to attempt to prevent Abraham
Lincoln’s election as the next President of the United States was unsuccessful as he
eventually was elected. His election caused the secession of the South, the final cause
for the Civil War. When considering how the Kansas-Nebraska Act led to this, the strong
division in political parties can definitely be said to have played the prominent role.
Values of This Study:
As stated in the Introduction, the Civil War took the lives of 600,000 men. By exploring
how the Kansas-Nebraska Act chained into other events, this study is valuable in
showcasing the effects of universal voting on a large scale problem. A more careful
precaution can be made in the future when a similar idea is implemented, for example,
making it so that not everyone has to be at the same location to vote or a more
anonymous voting center. Mistakes made in the past in history can be prevented from
happening again in the future. Now that we identified the source of the violence, a future
investigation can include exploring what types of voting can mitigate the violence that
occurs.

15

Works Cited
Benton-Short, Lisa. A Regional Geography of the United States and Canada: Toward a
Sustainable Future. 25 July 2018,
books.google.com/books?id=hSRgDwAAQBAJ.
Bergquist, James M. "Ebb and Flow of American Immigration: 19th Century." American
History, ABC-CLIO, 2020,
americanhistory.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/2212433. Accessed 13 Dec. 2020.
Bleeding Kansas: A Narrative Guide to the Sources
http://www1.assumption.edu/ahc/Kansas/default.html.
Corbett, Scott P, et al. “14.2 The Kansas-Nebraska Act and the Republican
Party.” OpenStax, OpenStax, 30 Dec. 2014,
openstax.org/books/us-history/pages/14-2-the-kansas-nebraska-act-and-t
he-republican-party.
"Cotton Gin." American History, ABC-CLIO, 2020,
americanhistory.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/261238. Accessed 13 Dec.
2020.
Cumo, Christopher M. "Market Revolution." American History, ABC-CLIO, 2020,
americanhistory.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/1444636. Accessed 13 Dec.
2020.
Eysturlid, Lee W. "Economy during the Civil War." American History, ABC-CLIO,
2020, americanhistory.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/1444011. Accessed
13 Dec. 2020.

16

Foner, Eric. Give Me Liberty!: An American History. New York: W.W. Norton & Co, 2008.
Print.
Fenneman, Nevin Melancthon, and Nevin M Fenneman. “Physiography of Western
United States.” Google Books, Google, 19 Feb. 2008,
books.google.com/books?id=tAtwAAAAIAAJ%2CPhysiography+of+Western+Uni
ted+States+Fenneman%2C+Nevin+M.
Frazier, Ian. “Great Plains.” Google Books, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 4 May 2001,
books.google.com/books?id=Doha_35sBQEC.
"Free Soil Party." American History, ABC-CLIO, 2020,
americanhistory.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/253462. Accessed 13 Dec. 2020.
"Fugitive Slave Act (1850)." American History, ABC-CLIO, 2020,
americanhistory.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/254309. Accessed 11 Aug. 2020.
Garrison, Zach. "Kansas-Nebraska Act" Civil War on the Western Border: The
Missouri-Kansas Conflict, 1854-1865. The Kansas City Public Library. Accessed
Tuesday, August 11, 2020 - 19:23 at
https://civilwaronthewesternborder.org/encyclopedia/kansas-nebraska-act.
Hamilton, Virginia. Many Thousand Gone: African Americans from Slavery to Freedom.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1991; Hopkinson, Deborah. Sweet Clara and the
Freedom Quilt. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1993; Lester, Julius. To Be a Slave.
New York: Scholastic, 1968.
Heidler, David S., and Jeanne T. Heidler. "Sectionalism." American Government,
ABC-CLIO, 2020,

17

americangovernment.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/318441. Accessed 29
Mar. 2020.
Holst, Hermann Von. 1854-1856. Kansas-Nebraska Bill-Buchanan's Election.
Callaghan, 1885,
https://books.google.com/books?id=GUlMAQAAMAAJ&pg=PA338&dq=kansas-n
ebraska+act&hl=en&newbks=1&newbks_redir=0&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjr1bb81_mAhWqm-AKHVkiCUUQ6AEwAXoECAAQAg#v=onepage&q&f=false.
“Industry and Economy during the Civil War (U.S. National Park Service).” National
Parks Service, U.S. Department of the Interior,
www.nps.gov/articles/industry-and-economy-during-the-civil-war.htm.
“Jackson, Mississippi, Mississippian [Democratic] (31 March 1854).” Bleeding
Kansas: A Narrative Guide to the Sources,
http://www1.assumption.edu/ahc/Kansas/default.html.
“Kansas-Nebraska Act.” Kansas-Nebraska Act - Ohio History Central,
ohiohistorycentral.org/w/Kansas-Nebraska_Act.
Lover, Harry. “Bleeding Kansas and the Origins of the Civil War.” C, 18 Aug. 2018,
www.c-span.org/video/?449563-1%2Fbleeding-kansas-origins-civil-war.
Marshall, Jim. "Industrial Revolution." American History, ABC-CLIO, 2020,
americanhistory.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/263229. Accessed 13 Dec. 2020.
McGuire, William, and Leslie Wheeler. "Edmund Ruffin." American History, ABC-CLIO,
2020, americanhistory.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/247774. Accessed 13 Dec.
2020.

18

Kronenwetter, Michael. "Immigration." American History, ABC-CLIO, 2020,
americanhistory.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/262177. Accessed 13 Dec. 2020.
Physiography of Western United States. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1931.
Poer, R. M., and Thomas D. Stetson. "Free Soil, Free Speech, Free Labor, and Free
Men!" Free Soil Platform. T.D. Stetson's Book and Job Printing Office, Post Office
Building, North Bridgewater., 1848.
"Political Cartoon Satirizing Kansas-Nebraska Act." American Government,
ABC-CLIO, 2020,
americangovernment.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/1295433. Accessed 29
Mar. 2020.
Rucker, Walter C., Jr. "Kansas-Nebraska Act." American History, ABC-CLIO,
2020, americanhistory.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/2123356. Accessed
11 Aug. 2020.
“Sack of Lawrence.” Kansas Historical Society, July 2016,
www.kshs.org/kansapedia/sack-of-lawrence/19754.
Schulten, Susan. “A History of America in 100 Maps.” Google Books, University
of Chicago Press, 21 Sept. 2018,
books.google.com/books?id=6E1nDwAAQBAJ.
Sharp, Paul F. The Northern Great Plains: A Study in Canadian-American
Regionalism. 1952.

19

“Speech on the Kansas-Nebraska Act, March 21, 1854: Abraham Lincoln, US
President: AMDOCS: Documents for the Study of American History.”
http://www.vlib.us/amdocs/texts/kansas.html.
The Nebraska-Kansas Act of 1854. United States, University of Nebraska Press,
2008.
"Whig Party." American History, ABC-CLIO, 2020,
americanhistory.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/253625. Accessed 13 Dec.
2020.
"Wilmot Proviso (1846)." American History, ABC-CLIO, 2020,
americanhistory.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/255272. Accessed 13 Dec.
2020.
Wilson, Charles Reagan. “Encyclopedia of Southern Culture.” Google Books,
University of North Carolina Press, 1 Oct. 2010,
books.google.com/books/about/Encyclopedia_of_Southern_Culture.html?i
d=V5oRAQAAMAAJ.
Wishart, David J. “Encyclopedia of the Great Plains.” Encyclopedia of the Great
Plains | The Great Plains Region,
plainshumanities.unl.edu/encyclopedia/intro.html.

To what extent did the Soviet involvement in the Soviet-Afgan War (1979-1989) lead to
the rise of the Taliban?
Group 3 : History

Word Count: 3,522

by
Nikolai Rura

Table of Contents
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
..... 6
Soviet Occupation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.....5
Post-Soviet Afghanistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . 11
Rise of the Taliban . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . 13
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . 14

To what extent did the Soviet involvement in the Soviet-Afgan War (1979-1989) lead to
the rise of the Taliban?

The mountainous region of Afghanistan, nestled between the vast eastern steppe and
the subcontinent, has earned the moniker “Graveyard of Empires”. A key strategic
region controlling access to India from the west, it has been a target for enterprising
empires from the time of Alexander. The latest power to assert its dominance over the
Afgan region is the United States, which, at the head of an international coalition of 43
nations, invaded the country in 2001 casting out the ruling Taliban faction. This group
had de facto control of the nation since 1996 and continues to hold real power to this
day in the eastern and southern Pashtun majority sections of the country. To
understand the Taliban and why it holds the power it does in Afghanistan, it is
necessary to understand its origins and to look back on the last empire which occupied
Afghanistan. The Soviet Union garrisoned the Afgan mountains for the entirety of the
1980s and their bootprints still shape the topography of the conflict to this day. This
paper will answer the following question: To what extent did the Soviet involvement in
the Soviet-Afgan War (1979-1989) lead to the rise of the Taliban?
Background
The Soviet Union had no intention of committing troops to the conflict in Afghanistan.
Their material support to the Afgan regime stretched back to the Russian Revolution
when the nascent Red Army sent weapons, supplies, and even aircraft to Afgan rebels
in the Third Anglo-Afgan War. As a result of that war, the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan

was reformed into the Kingdom of Afghanistan, throwing off the shackles of British
dominion. The Kingdom under the rule of King Amanullah Khan, son of the last Emir,
along with the civilian parliament in Kabul pushed for westernizing reforms which
alienated a coalition of conservative factions leading to civil war. This war claimed the
life of the King, and his successor (his brother Nadir Shah) was soon after assassinated
by a student sympathetic to the crushed rebels cause. King ​Amanullah’s nephew, the
19-year-old Mohammed Zahir Shah ascended the throne in 1933 and would rule until
1973. While Shah maintained official power as king, his cousin and Prime Minister
Mohammed Daoud Khan would exercise control over the civilian governance of the
state. The Afgan government pursued good relations with all nations, receiving
economic development from the Axis Powers, and during the Cold War, from both the
Allied and Soviet Blocs. In 1973, while King Shah was out of the country on official state
business, Prime Minister Daoud Khan staged a bloodless coup and seized power for
himself, proclaiming the Republic of Afghanistan. The main opposition for his Pashtun
nationalist presidency came from the People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan
(communists backed by the Soviet Union). The Afgan Communists were divided
however into two opposing factions, the Khalq (People or Masses) faction which
supported a hardline pro-soviet stance and was comprised mostly of lower-class
Pashtuns, and the Parcham (Banner or Flag) faction which supported a gradual
transition to socialism and was considered to be more moderate comprised of more
affluent and urban members. These groups reconciled their differences long enough to
launch the Saur Revolution, or April Coup, in which Communist forces backed by the

Army overthrew Khan and proclaimed the Democratic Republic of Afganistan, the
General Secretary of which would be Khalq faction leader Nur Muhammad Taraki.
Taraki’s brief administration faced crisis, as his reforms proved unpopular with the
common people leading to unrest and insurgency in the provinces, and rival groups
jockeyed for control within the halls of power of Kabul. Members of the moderate
Paracham faction were sidelined, and eventually purged from the government, but
increasingly Taraki faced threat from one of his own deputies, a Khalq faction member
named Hafizullah Amin. Amin had been a key figure in the Saur Revolution and
capitalized on the Herat Uprising (a mutiny of DRA troops accompanied by a popular
revolt in the province of Herat) to gain political capital in the government. After the
revolt, Taraki took a trip to Moscow, where he implored Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev
to commit troops to ensure the stability of Afghanistan. The response of Alexi Kosygin,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers, would serve as a glimpse of what the Afgan
conflict would become. In his rejection of Taraki’s request, Kosygin wrote “We believe it
would be a fatal mistake to commit ground troops. [...] If our troops went in, the situation
in your country would not improve. On the contrary, it would get worse. Our troops
would have to struggle not only with an external aggressor, but with a significant part of
your own people. And the people would never forgive such things'' (Walker 253). Taraki
returned to Kabul, but he would not live to see the end of 1979. Upon his return to the
city, he was greeted by Amin who had at this point consolidated control of the
government. Taraki attempted several last-ditch attempts to hold on to power, including
an attempted assassination of Amin coordinated with the Soviets. After this failed, Amin

made his move, ordering tanks into the city and detaining Taraki. Amin believed that the
Soviets would support him, but his actions horrified Brezhnev, who (after Taraki was
smothered to death by Amin’s men) began planning an intervention in Afghanistan.
Although Amin was a hardline Communist (he kept a picture of Stalin on his desk), his
regime courted both the United States and Maoist China, moves that alarmed Soviet
leadership. Despite his attempts to reconcile with both Islamic and Tribal leadership
(traditional enemies of the Communists) Amin’s regime quickly lost control of the rural
parts of the country and the army fell into a state of disarray. All the while, Amin’s exiled
enemies both former Tarakists and Paracham leaders, lobbied the Soviets to intervene.
Soviet leadership also feared the results if Amin’s regime was overthrown, seeing the
possibility of the mujahideen resistance gaining control of the nation and creating an
Islamic Afghanistan that would, in turn, foment revolt in the majority Islamic Central
Asian Republics of the Soviet Union. The resistance to Amin’s rule was backed by
Pakistan, and by extension the United States and China, so the Soviets also saw a loss
in Afghanistan as a loss to their geostrategic adversaries. These factors lead three key
Politburo members: Foreign Minister Gromyko, Defense Minister Ustinov and KGB
Minister Andropov to convince Brezhnev of the necessity of an Afgan intervention.
Soviet Occupation
Soviet troops entered Afghanistan on December 25th, Christmas Day, of 1979. They left
on the 15th of February of 1989. The intervening period of conflict is known as the
Soviet-Afgan War, though perhaps that name is misleading. Much like the American war
in Vietnam, and indeed her later wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the Soviet forces faced

not a government or even a unified opposition but an uncoordinated guerilla opponent
and found many of the same difficulties in confronting an asymmetrical enemy as their
American counterparts. Although to the Soviet troops anyone who offered resistance
was a ‘mujahed’ (short for mujahadeen meaning “ones engaged in holy war for Islam”)
the composition of the anti-communist resistance is vital for understanding the period
after the Soviet withdrawl and the conditions that made the Taliban’s rise possible. The
first enemy that the 40th Army of the Soviet Union dealt with were loyalists of Amin’s
regime. 700 KGB and GRU special forces, with assistance from Soviet troops that had
been in the capitol at the Afgan’s request, seized Kabul and, through the use of an
airborne assault, broke through the defenses of the Presidential Palace at Tajbeg and
killed the dictator. This detachment had effectively won the war, no part of the Afgan
National Army offered any serious resistance to the sudden change in government, but
the task of pacifying Afghanistan was far from over. Soviet ground forces entered the
country on the 27th of December of 1979, from the Northwest and Northeast converging
on the southern city of Kandahar. Fig. 1 illustrates the “ring” of Soviet control, consisting
of Afghanistan's major roads and cities. This band of territory would be the only part of
the country where the DRA exercised de-facto control until the end of the war.

(​Fig. 1​ Soviet invasion of Afghanistan circa. 1979)
The Soviets installed Barbak Kermal as the President of the Demorcatic Republic of
Afghanistan, an exiled member of the Paracham faction, and he asked for Soviet
assistance in bringing peace to his troubled nation. Although Soviet commanders
originally intended to provide only limited support to local troops in their conflict, it
quickly became apparent that the Afgan Army was incompetent, disloyal and prone to
defection. Mujahideen commanders interviewed by American officers after the war
about their tactics declared “We always wanted to hit DRA columns since they wouldn't
fight, whereas Soviet columns would.” (Jalali, Garu 47-48) Thus the task of fighting the
war in Afghanistan fell primarily on the shoulders of the OKSVA (Limited Contingent of
Soviet Forces in Afghanistan) who’s numbers would swell to more than a hundred
thousand men. The opposition to the Soviet occupation came from a variety of fronts,
with the mujahideen initially lacking any sort of unification beyond an antipathy to Soviet
occupation. Most of the opposition operated on the grounds of religious resistance, but
local tribal lords and minority communities who opposed communist reforms made
common cause with these groups. There were hundreds of independent mujahideen

commanders who each commanded anywhere from 20 to 400 men, but as the war
continued many of these were assimilated into one of the seven major sunni factions.
The simplest way to understand the major factions in the mujahideen movement is to
understand the foreign backers of the various factions. Most of the rest of the world
condemned the Soviet invasion, and seeing an opportunity to deal a blow to a Cold War
adversary began supplying the Mujahideen with weapons and supplies. Pakistan was
the main conduit for foreign support to the anti-soviet forces, but their own ambitions
would lead to the conditions for the civil war following the Soviet withdrawal. Pakistani
foreign policy with regards to Afghanistan was dictated almost entirely by it’s
semi-independent intelligence service, the ISI, which exercised significant control over
both the Army and Government of Pakistan. The goal of ISI leadership was to exploit
the Afgan conflict to set up a client state upon the Soviet defeat, and to that end they
directed the lion’s share of materiel and support not only from their nation but also from
the United States and China to Gulbudin Hekmayatar’s Hezb-e Islami faction (known as
Hezb-e Islami Gulbudin), who lacked a serious political base in Afghanistan and were
for all intents and purposes Pakistani puppets. British MI6 chose to instead support
Ahmad Shah Massoud and the Jamiat-e Islami who had withstood sustained Soviet
brutality in the Panjshir Valley. These two factions would form the backbones of both
sides in the civil war of the 1990s. Saudi Government supported a group known as the
Ittehad-e Islami (Islamic Union for the Liberation of Afghanistan) which were aligned
with Gulbudin and who fought bitterly with Hebz-i Wahdat, a Shia group backed
primarily by Iran. Gulbudin also enjoyed the support of thousands of international

volunteer soldiers, known as the Arab Afgans, who left their countries to fight for Islam.
Many of these young men would form the leadership of later Islamic Jihadist
movements, and among them was a young Osama Bin Laden.
Faced with such stiff opposition, Soviet commanders turned to the tried and true
doctrine of extreme force that had worked so well to quell rebellions in Eastern Europe
and their own territories. The Soviets organized a brutal secret police known as the
KHAD, the leadership of which was entrusted to Mohammed Najibullah, another
member of the Paracham faction. While most urban centers (with the exception of
Kandahar and Herat) were under total Soviet rule, the countryside and nearly 80% of
the country were Mujahadeen territory. As the war dragged on the Soviets ramped up
attacks on this land, often using helicopters to destroy villages suspected of
sympathising with the islamist cause. Tribal armies (called lashkar), DRA defectors and
any other opponent that would face the Soviets in open combat was quickly destroyed
but the Afgan resistance excelled at ambushes and hit and run tactics allowing them to
evade a direct confrontation. Both sides would routinely employ toruture and targeted
civilians to gain an edge on their opponents. The war would cause a humanitarian crisis,
with millions of Afghans fleeing into neighboring Pakistan and Iran. The war was a major
drag on the Soviet state, with thousands of men dying and nearly fifty billion dollars
spent annually on a conflict with no readily visible gain and no end in sight. With the
death of Premier Brezhnev and the ascension of Mikhail Gorbachev to the position of
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Soviet Union, Soviet High Command
began planning a withdrawal from Afghanistan. It would be this withdrawal that would

create the necessary conditions for the rise of the Taliban and the current state of
Afghanistan.
Post-Soviet Afghanistan
On February 15th, a column of BTRs crossed the Hairatan Bridge at the border of
Afghanistan and the Uzbek SSR to much fanfare. Under the watchful eye of the
international media, the last Soviet troops exited Afghanistan, marking an end to the first
and only war that the Soviet Union lost. The Soviets had entered the conflict under the
impression that the conflict in Afghanistan would be not dissimilar to their occupations of
neighboring Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan, where token resistance was swept
aside by the might first of the Imperial Russian and later the Red Armies. Unlike those
countries, where Russian colonists brought with them all the benefits of civilization that
the 19th century could offer, building the first modern city in Tajikistan as well as
electricity and agricultural reform that would allow total Soviet domination of the
Turkestan ACCP. Afghanistan by contrast had become a developing nation while
maintaining its political independence as a consequence of it’s strategic geographic
location; the ‘Great Game’ led nations to pump billions of dollars of development of the
region without the control that the Bolsheviks enjoyed in the parts of Central Asia
incorporated into the USSR. The resistance that the Soviets faced was therefore orders
of magnitude more fierce than that given by practically the same peoples only dozens of
miles north of the border. The Tajik and Uzbek SSRs were key regions of the Soviet
empire, providing invaluable natural resources like oil and rare earth minerals, and the
majority Islamic and native population were ruled by a small Russian elite. One of the

greatest fears for any Soviet leader was the spread of jihaddi ideology to the USSR’s
nearly 50 million Muslims. Once it became clear that the Afgan campaign would not
mirror the Soviet demolition of Basmachi resistance in Tajikistan it ironically became so
much more important to Soviet leaders that victory in Afghanistan was to be achieved.
Because of the fear that a disgraceful defeat in Afghanistan would lead to serious rebel
movements in the rest of Islamic Soviet Central Asia; the more successful Afgan
mujahideen were, the more imperative it became to defeat them. This vicious cycle
dragged the Soviets deeper and deeper into the Afgan quagmire until Gorbachev
decided to cut his losses and unilaterally withdraw. Popular culture portrays the defeat
of the Soviets as a victory for a monolithic mujahadeen, or even for the Taliban regime
that would later go on to be deposed in 2001. At the time of the Soviet withdrawal the
Taliban didn’t exist, and even as BTRs crossed that bridge of red flags mujahideen
commanders already had begun infighting. In the post-Soviet Afghanistan two main
factions wrestled for control of the country: Gulbudin Hekmayatar’s Hezb-e Islami
forces (supported by Pakistan’s ISI) and a loose coalition of Mujahideen Commanders
foremost of whom was Ahmad Shah Massoud. The Soviets had left behind a rump state
under the leadership of Dr Mohammad Najibullah (former head of the KHAD secret
service) which kept nominal control of formerly occupied territories, most importantly the
capital city of Kabul. After the Soviet withdrawal the Peshawar accords ironed out a
power sharing agreement to construct an interim transition government, an agreement
signed onto by all but one major faction. While every other mujahideen leader had
agreed to a broad coalition and government under respected commander Sibghatullah

Mojaddedi, ​Gulbuddin Hekmatyar seized this opportunity to launch an all out assault to
take Kabul for himself. An all out rocket attack on the capital city marked the beginning
of the Afgan Civil War of the 1990s as a coalition of Mujahideen commanders battled
first with Gulbuddin and later the newcomer Taliban for control of the country.
Rise of the Taliban
Talib in Arabic means student, it is from this that the name Taliban is derived; the
Taliban began as a student movement at madrassas (islamic schools) throughout
Pakistan, promising to sweep away the warlords and endemic corruption of Afghanistan
and instead install a puritanical islamic society. As the war dragged on, the ISI lost faith
in Gulbuddin and the Taliban provided the perfect replacement for the advancement of
Pakistani interests, not only due to their strict interpretation of Islam but also their
Pashtun enthic base which tied the Taliban to thier southern neighbors more than
northern groups with a Tajik or Uzbek enthic core. Over the course of only a few years
nearly all of Pakistani military aid in Afghanistan would be shifted from Hekmatyar to the
Taliban, and ​Hezb-e Islami Gulbudin which relied almost exclusively on it’s foreign
backer to maintain power would collapse. Gulbudin himself would go on to flee to Iran,
where he would remain in obscurity until 2003. On the 3rd of November 1994 the
Taliban under the leadership of Mullah Mohhamed Omar launched an attack that
captured the southern city of Kandahar. Within two months the Taliban controlled 12
Afgan provinces. Within a year Taliban forces took Herat, and ​Ahmad Shah Massoud
ordered a general retreat into the Hindu Kush to found the resistance force that would
later come to be the Northern Alliance. The Taliban’s blitzkrieg advance through a

country ravaged by decades of constant war, where armies had fought over the same
piece of land in some cases quite literally since 1973, was nothing short of miraculous.
Taliban forces enjoyed a reputation for justice and faced almost no resistance in taking
control of lands that were previously occupied by Gulbuddin, with accounts of powerful
mujahideen commanders who had fought for years willingly surrendering and laying
down their arms when engaging with the Taliban. Although many westerners view the
Taliban as an oppressive regime, most Afghans welcomed them as a devout and holy
alternative to the corrupt warlords that had occupied that country for so long. Perhaps
more critical however was the weakening of the Taliban’s major opponents in the North
by decades of conflict, precipitated by the Soviet invasion leading to a weary and
bloodstained force burdened by reputation developed over years of brutal war. Whereas
nearly every mujahideen group that had existed since Soviet occupation had a troubling
history of atrocities committed against various groups due to the necessities of war, the
Taliban presented a fresh face, and the Taliban’s ability to cross ethnic lines by
incorporating Tajiks and Uzbeks in its ranks gave in an appeal that Gulbudin could
never achieve.
Conclusion
As the war in Afghanistan continues into the present, understanding the roots of the
conflict is as prescient as ever for those interested in resolving the conflict. The role of
Soviet forces in creating the necessary conditions for the Taliban to thrive is a long term
consequence of the occupation that reverberates even through modern attempts at
pacification. Influence of foreign powers, especially the ISI and it’s western backers

would be key to the growth and control of groups like Hezb-e Islami Gulbudin, which
were propped up solely due to Soviet involvement. The direct involvement of Soviet
troops turned a relatively low intensity conflict between urban Afghanistan and the
countryside lakashars into an escalated geostrategic conflict, one where industrial scale
atrocities became so commonplace that the populace was primed to turn to the Taliban
as a hope for a new way forward. Soviet troops also weakened those that would later
become the Taliban’s opponents, the mujahadeen aligned with Ahmad Shah Massoud
who were the chief recipients of Soviet attack due to their geographical proximity,
whereas the Pashtun lands that would come to be Taliban strongholds were. What
began as an internal political conflict within the party leadership of the CPDRA would
lead not only to the total ouster of the Communist Party but also to more than four
decades of non-stop war. Even now, in the aftermath of the collapse of the USSR and
the defeat of the Taliban by Coalition forces, the aftermath of these regimes still have an
effect on the region. The boot prints of the Soviet Union made the soil of Afghanistan
fertile for the seed of the Taliban to grow.

Bibliography
Primary Sources​Aleksievich, S., Whitby, J., Whitby, R., & Heinemann, L. (1992). ​Zinky
boys: Soviet voices from the Afghanistan war​. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company.
"DECREE of the Secretariat of the CC CPSU - An Appeal to the Leaders of the PDPA
Groups 'Parcham' and 'Khalq' ," January 08, 1974, History and Public Policy Program
Digital Archive, RGANI (formerly TsKhSD), f. 89, op. 46, d. 103, ll. 31.
https://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/112505
Gorbachev, M. (1988, December 8). The Gorbachev Visit; Excerpts From Speech to
U.N. on Major Soviet Military Cuts. ​New York Times,​ p. 1.
Secondary Sources
US Map of Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan [Digital image]. (2007, March 25). Retrieved
August 10, 2020, from ​http://cgsc.leavenworth.army.mil
Bardawaj, K. (2014). Searching for an Enemy. Partridge Pub.
The Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, 1979. Dupree L. Am Univ Field Staff Rep Asia

Jalali, Ali A., and Lester W. Grau. “The Other Side of the Mountain: Mujahideen
Tactics in

the Soviet-Afghan War.” ​Tribal Analysis Center,​ Jan. 1995,

doi:10.21236/ada376862.

Bajoria, Jayshree. “The Taliban in Afghanistan.” Council on Foreign Relations,
Council on Foreign Relations, 6 Oct. 2011,
https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/taliban-afghanistan​.

Walker, Martin (1993). ​The Cold War and the Making of the Modern World.​ ​Fourth
Estate

United States, Central Intelligence Agency, National Foreign Assesment Center. (n.d.).
Afghanistan Ethic Diversity and Dissidence​ (pp. 1-11).

﻿


TO WHAT EXTEND DID THE UNITED STATES’ LEVEL OF INVOLVEMENT IN SINO-JAPANESE CONFLICT FROM 1931 TO 1945 INCREASE ANTAGONISMS OF JAPANESE AMERICANS AND CHINESE AMERICANS?

Group 3: History

Word Count: 3,754











Table of Contents
Table of Contents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Pre-War America and Chinese American Animosity towards Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
American Isolationism (1931-1937) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
American Attention to the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937-1942) . . . . . . . .
American Involvement and Mainstream Xenophobia (1942-1945)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Differentiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Condemnation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Exploitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . .i
. .1
. . 2
 . . .2
. . .6
. . .8
. . 9
. .11
. . 13
 .14
. . 16






2




1

1

HOW INSTRUMENTAL WAS JOHN A. MACDONALD IN THE UNIFICATION OF
CANADIAN PROVINCES (1837-1885)?

Group 3: History

Word Count: 3,530

by
Alex Vu

2

Abstract
The focus of this extended essay will be primarily on John A. Macdonald and his
hand in the unification of the Canadian provinces from the years 1845 to 1885. This
essay will undertake a historical investigation of Canada’s provincial background, early
government as the Dominion of Canada, and the policies set in place by John A.
Macdonald More specifically, this investigation will explain the relationship between
John A. Macdonald and his influence on Canada by examining the following question:
How instrumental was John A. Macdonald in the unification of the Canadian provinces
(1837-1885)?
The scope of the extended essay will also cover the early life of John A.
Macdonald in order to establish an idea for his character and political upbringing. The
essay will primarily cover social-economic-political events of this time period. In
addition, the essay will also briefly cover the American Civil War and its effects it had on
the Dominion of Canada.
As a non-Canadian, I attempted to use as many primary and secondary sources
as possible to better understand Canadian history of this time period. Also, sources that
contained differing opinions and viewpoints of historians were used in regards to many
key events to further analyze and buttress the arguments proposed.

3

Table of Contents
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Introduction .​ ​. . . . . . . . ​. .​ . . . . . . ​. ​. . . . . . . . . . . .​ .​ . . . . . . . . . ​.​ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
John A. Macdonald

. . . . . . . . ​.​ . . . .​ ​. . . . . . . . . .​ ​. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

Early Career in Colonial Leadership . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .​ ​. . . . . .5
Political Deadlock in the Province of Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Hostile American Influences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
The Dominion of Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
An Unlikely Alliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Charlottetown Conference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Quebec Conference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
London Conference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10
Macdonald’s Works as Prime Minister . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
The National Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

4

Background
Hailing from European ancestry is the red maple leaf country of Canada. With the
province of Yukon to its far west and the province of Newfoundland to the far east, the
country of Canada boasts four million miles inland and claims the title of the World’s 2nd
biggest country. The country of Canada is composed of ten provinces and three
territories that each have their own background and cultures. With a Constitutional
monarchy, Canadians recognize a King or Queen as head of state, and a prime Minister
that is elected through democratic means is the head of government. With further
descending levels of government from a federal level, to provincial, all the way down to
a municipal level (Waite). Canada is known all over the world for its maple syrup and
the politeness of its inhabitants. However, Canada has not always been the unified
nation it is today. To understand the historical context of this time period, it is vital to
understand the vast differences of each province and their cultures. Canadian history
dates all the way back to the 16th century, the country would be inhabited by many
different European countries and their subsequent colonies over the years. The very
first settlers were the Mi’kmaq and Maliseet people, two tribes of ​First Nations people (a
term used to describe earlier Canadian indigenous people) that settled in Canada’s
eastern maritime regions (Budde 246). Next, ​Frenchman Jacques Cartier was the first
European to map out the Saint Lawrence River and claim the area in the name of the
French Crown. Interactions between First Nations People and the French expeditions
proved to be beneficial as the French were introduced to the area's bountiful fur trade.
The fur trade would spur the French Government to invest into the area and enlist
Samuel D. Chaplin to develop the area known as the Hudson Bay. In 1603 and 1608,

5

Samuel D. Chaplin would establish Canada’s two first colonies; the early colony of
Acadia which later on would be known as Nova Scotia, and the city fort of Quebec
(Arsenault 11-12). For the next century and a half, the French would continue to
develop the area for economic gain. However, general development and population
growth were slow, especially with the outbreak of the Anglo-French war of 1627,
development of the Hudson Bay area would grind to a halt. The newly created
Company of New France was granted the colony of New France, but In 1663, King
Louis XIV canceled the charter of the Company of New France and created New France
into a royal province ​(Anievas and​ Nişancioğlu 175). ​With this proclamation, the area of
New France officially became a royal colony of France. In addition to this, King Louis
XIV sent a military expedition under the command of Alexander de Prouville to establish
control in the area, once control was established only then was it possible to populate
and develop the New France area. More than 3,000 settlers were sent to the colony
during the 1660s which allowed for a natural increase in population in the following
years ​(Anievas and​ Nişancioğlu 182).
During the early 1600s, the empires of England and France both competed
intensely for control of the North American region. The outbreak of the Anglo-French
war of 1627 was the precursor for more conflicts between the two warring nations. King
William’s War (an extension of the Grand Alliance war of 1687) saw further fighting
between the two nations. Sir William Phips of the British led a fleet and seized
French-controlled Acadia, however, French efforts led by Louis de Buade halted British
advancement on the colony of Quebec. Thanks to Canadian efforts in assisting their
French counterparts, specifically Canadian-born Pierre le Moyne, Acadia would be

6

under French control as well as previously British-controlled Hudson Bay of the
Newfoundland area. The war would end in 1607 by the Treaty of Rijswijk. In the
following years 1700 and 1701, a peaceful relationship between the French and
Iroquois was established (​Anievas and Nişancioğlu 176). ​This combination of control of
the Hudson Bay, a key area of the fur trade, France stood at the height of their fortunes.
However, this only encouraged future English activities in New France. The decline of
French control of the New France territories began with the War of the Spanish
Succession. In 1710 the French ceased to control Acadia, and in the following years the
English would go on to recover the Hudson Bay through the Treaty of Utrecht, the treaty
that would end the War of the Spanish Succession. In 1756, the Seven Years’ War
began in North America. With the war being across the Atlantic Ocean, both sides
enlisted the help of indigenous tribes, with the French recruiting their Iroquois allies
(Budde 250). Now, the British held the overall advantage, the British colonies in
America boasted over 1 million people, and had strong social and economic
infrastructure. In comparison, the French colonies consisted of a measly 70,000 people,
and were economically weak (Aitchison 549). Often depending on France for economic
assistance and defense. Despite the stark difference of overall power, The French and
their allies held out surprisingly well for 2 years, but eventually succumbed against the
superior naval power of the British, and in 1759 James Wolfe captured Quebec. A year
later, in 1760, Montreal fell to Jeffrey Amherst. With the consecutive capturing of key
French locations, the end of the Seven Years’ War came about, just as the end of
French control of the New France territories came to an end (Arsenault 13). This serves
as a turning point for the life of all people living in the new Province of Quebec, renamed

7

by the English from its previous name of New France. The Proclamation of 1763
completely changed the landscape of what used to be New France, what was
previously multiple different French colonies, now became one large collective English
territory of the British Empire (Lum 48). Under the British Empire,​ there were three main
provinces, Nova Scotia (formly Acadia) to the far east , New Brunswick situated in the
middle of Nova Scotia ,and finally the Province of Canada which in itself consisted of
two smaller but important regions of West and East Canada. Other commonly referred
to names for West and East Canada are Lower and Upper Canada, with East Canada
being Lower Canada, and West Canada being Upper Canada. However today
thankfully, they are more commonly known as Ontario (West) and Quebec (East) (Lum
50).

Introduction
The “unification” of the Canadian provinces can be seen many times throughout history.
From when the French empire grouped up all the early French colonies into one
collective New France, or in 1841 the Act of Union 1840 approved by the British
Parliament created the Province of Canada unifying all Canadian provinces during that
time period However, for these two events, the action of unification was done by a third
party, an external force in which the Canadian people did not have control over. John A.
Macdonald was an instrumental figure that played a significant role in the unification of
Canadian provinces, this investigation will mainly focus on Macdonald’s political
upbringing, the British North America Act of 1867 (and its subsidiary events), the
building of the Intercolonial Canadian railway, and Macdonald’s National Policy.

8

John A. Macdonald
Sir John Alexander Macdonald was born the third of five children on January 10th, 1815
in Glasgow, Scotland to a pair of merchants. Early in his life, Macdonald’s family
emigrated to Kingston, Canada where Macdonald attended the Midland District
Grammar School. Macdonald’s formal education ended at the age 15, and due to his
father’s repeated failed attempts at a business, young Macdonald quickly needed to find
a source of income to support his family (Gagnon 201). Traveling to York (known as
Toronto 1834 onwards) Macdonald passed an examination and began a law
apprenticeship under George Mackenzie, a prominent lawyer. After 4 years, Mackenzie
died of cholera and the young Macdonald started his career as a lawyer in 1835
(Chauvin 40). In 1836 we can see the very first influences Macdonald had on the
unification of the Canadian provinces, Macdonald would take on two students in the
form of Oliver Mowat and Alexander Campbell. Both of his students would become
fellow Fathers of the Canadian Confederation and become the Premier of Ontario and
Lieutenant Governor of Ontario respectively. Early on in Macdonald’s law career he
consistently gained attention for his political acuteness and quality of defence in trials
(Preece 460).

Early Career in Colonial Leadership
Macdonald’s political prominence and rise can be much contributed to his study of
election law and parliamentary procedure. This can be attributed much to Macdonanld’s
personality, Macdonald was not a public speaker and heavily disliked the bombastic

9

addresses of the time period. Macdonald began his political career in 1843 under the
Conservative party with his first political victory in Kingston being elected for the position
of alderman (Skelly 72). By 1847, Macdonald was appointed Receiver General of the
Conservative party a testament to his abilities that allowed him to expand his power and
influence in the Conservative party. In 1857 Macdonald was appointed the new premier
of the Conservatives replacing the old premier Tache (Skelly 74). It is also important to
note during this time period there was a fairly large political divide between Eastern
(Liberal) and Western (Conservative) Canada. This can be much attributed to the
lifestyles each province had, as such reaching a compromise between the two would
become increasingly difficult. Macdonald had many disputes with Canada East in
deciding the city should be Canada’s Capital and subsequent elections that saw
Macdonald lose and then be reelected (Chauvin 40).

Political Deadlock in the Province of Canada
Through the Act of Union of 1840, the Province of Canada was created with the
approval of the British Parliament. The Province of Canada was composed of Canada
West and Canada East, the two regions were to be governed jointly through an
appointed assembly with an elected governor. During the late 1850s and early 1860s
the provincial government began to become increasingly difficult as cultural differences
erupted (Lum 52). Canada East consisted of a French Canadian majority of 510,000
people out of 670,000 total, on the other hand Canada West comprised mainly English
speakers and had a total population of 480,000 (Waite). The purpose of the Act of
Union 1840 had the goal of assimilating the French-Canadian minority (of the entire
Province of Canada) into the English speaking majority. However, issues between the

10

two began over the distribution of seats in the colonial legislature, although both
received an equal number of seats, a large number of East Canadians believed they
were being underrepresented as they had a larger population than Canada West.
During this time period for any legislation to be approved in the Legislative Assembly a
majority from both sides were required, or known as a “double majority” (Chauvin 43). A
deadlock in the Legislative Assembly resulted from this double majority requirement,
with Canada West’s leader George Brown demanding for a “representation by
population” system where Canada West would have more seats in the legislature.
Naturally, Canada East opposed these demands wishing to maintain the power
balance. For the next decade the Assembly would see many different figures rise to
power that showcases the political turmoil of this time period. In 1858, Macdonald
resigned from his position and Sir Edmund Walker Head succeeded the office of
Governor General. Macdonald would soon regain his power in by-elections, in which he
gained a majority vote and defeated Head. In spite of this, by 1862 John Sandfield
Macdonald (no relation to John Macdonald) took control of the Assembly. Macdonald
would not be out of power for long, in 1863 Macdonald won again through a by-election
with the Conserative party, with a conservative victory the majority of seats shifted in the
Assembly netting a Conserative Assembly. John A. Macdonald returned to office as
Governor General. Just a few months later, Macdonald’s government would be
defeated (McLachlan 11-13). In just a few years the Assembly had seen a number of
governments that only highlighted the political instability of this time period. With the
current constitutional rules in place, it was clear a new form of government was needed.

Hostile American Influences

11

A large external factor to be considered is the American Civil War. Fears of American
advancement into Canada highlighted the fears of many Canadian politicians. Just a
century earlier at the outbreak of the American Revolution, American forces invaded
Canada occupying the inner city of Montreal, attacking the city of Quebec, and raided
key British ports that were vital to the economy, these events would be known as the
Invasion of Quebec (Victor). The potential threat of another American invasion on
Canadian soil pressed the importance of a unified Canadian state to fight off potential
invaders.

The Dominion of Canada
In order to determine the extent of John A. Macdonald was instrumental in the
unification of the Canadian provinces, the investigation will examine the events that led
to the Dominion of Canada, a confederation of Canadian provinces consisting of Nova
Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec (formerly Canada East), and Ontario (formly Canada
West).

An Unlikely Alliance
By 1864 the political environment of the Province of Canada reached its height. John A.
Macdonald was approached by George Brown to join hands in constitutional reform
during this time of crisis. Although Brown had the goal of propagating “rep by pop”, John
A. Macdonald saw this as an opportunity to unite the Canadian provinces under a single
federation. The alliance would be known as the Great Coalition (Aitchison 553). This
unlikely alliance between political foes promoted cooperativity between the Canadian
provinces, more specifically attracted the attention of the Maritime regions of Nova
Scotia and Prince Edward Island (PEI).

12

Charlottetown Conference
The Charlottetown Conference was the first of a series of meetings that led to the
creation of the Dominion of Canada. In attendance was Samuel Leonard Tilley of New
Brunswick, Charles Tupper of Nova Scotia, William Henry Pope of PEI, Frederic Carter
of Newfoundland, George-Etienne Cartier of Canada East, and finally John A.
Macdonald of Canada West (Lee). Although this first meeting produced nothing
physical, the importance of the Charlottetown Conference resides in the fact John A.
Macdonald was able to propose the idea of a greater Canadian union to the Maritime
Provinces. Further appealing to the idea of a federation would provide mutual protection
and economic trade.

Quebec Conference
The same delegates who met in Charlottetown convened in Quebec City for the Quebec
Conference. ​A central issue pertaining to the Quebec Conference was the distribution of
powers between Federal and provincial governments. Macdonald cited reasons for a
strong central government, he applied his case to the outbreak of the American Civil
War (Lee). John A. Macdonald was instrumental in the talks pertaining to the
compromise, powers would be held between a central parliament and descending
provincial governments, this in turn created a federal union where the interests of the
provinces were still protected. The provinces had control over language, education,
municipalities, and a multitude of other things. The Parliament would have two houses,
the lower House of Commons which consisted of elected individuals from the provinces,
representation would be decided on population, and the upper house or Legislative
Council would be decided by appointments and have an equal amount of seats (Lee).

13

The basis for the Canada’s government would be embodied in the Seventy-Two
Resolutions, out of the 72, 50 were written by John A. Macdonald himself. Macdonald’s
heightened involvement in discussions and creation of the 72 resolutions has made
Macdonald an insanely influential individual in the unification of the Canadian provinces.

4.4 London Conference
The London Conference was the last of the three conferences and was held in London
to gain the approval of the British Parliament to amend the previously created 72
resolutions. The passing of the 72 resolutions can be greatly attributed to Macdonald’s
leadership in London. Macdonald chaired and led many of the discussions, his
performance prompted Sir Frederic Rogers of the British described him as “the ruling
genius” of the conference (Lee). A preceding issue of the conference was in the form of
anti-confederation groups in Nova Scotia, these groups threatened an important
election regarding the question of Confederation. Macdonald urged the Canadian
delegates to quickly work towards amendment. A contentious issue presided in
educational clauses, Roman Catholic bishops in the Maritime Provinces sought for
separate Roman Catholic schools. Delegate Alexander Galt sought protection for the
rights of the English minority in Quebec. Again proving his dominance in the
conference, Macdonald was able to mediate the differences and strike a balance that
satisfied both parties, this would come to be reflected in Section 93 of the resolutions.
With all issues resolved, the final draft authorizing Canada’s federation was presented
to Queen Victoria, and with her approval, the British North America Act of 1867 came
into fruition (Kennedy 147). The former colonies of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and
the Province of Canada officially became the Dominion of Canada. Each would still

14

remain its own province, with the only major changes being in name. With the Province
of Canada from East and West Canada to Quebec and Ontario. As a testament to
Macdonald’s massive influence in the passing of the BNA of 1867, Macdonald was
appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath (Preece 471). In addition,
Historian W. P. M Kennedy grants a unique perspective on the interpretation of the
British North America Act. Citing that, without the increased involvement of Macdonald,
the passing of the BNA of 1867 would have been greatly delayed, or would have never
occurred at all.

Macdonald’s Works as Prime Minister
John A. Macdonald presided as the Dominion of Canada’s first prime minister. The first
general election was held in the summer of 1867, with the results in a majority for
Macdonald and his Liberal-Conserative party. One of Macdonald’s first orders of
business was to further unify the Canadian provinces. A way in which he does this was
through the Intercolonial Railway that will be discussed later on.
The first colony to be admitted into the Dominion of Canada was Nova Scotia,
Macdonald was able to win the support of the colony after the promise of improved
financial and trade deals. Macdonald wished for the Dominion of Canada to have a
Pacific outlet in the West, the Colony of British Columbia quickly became this site.
British Columbia agreed to join the Dominion on the terms of the Dominion would
shoulder British Columbia debt, and in 10 years time a railway linking the Eastern and
Western provinces was to be constructed (Decker 293). The incorporation of these two
new territories further unified the Canadian land mass, however this would come at a
cost. Although John A. Macdonald succeeded in the addition of two new provinces, his

15

promises to build the railroad would be exposed in the Pacific Scandal. The Pacific
Scandal was the bribing of government ministers to win the charter for the Canadian
Pacific Railway, from this Macdonald continually lost support in the House of Commons
and public, forcing Macdonald to resign (Waite).

The National Policy
John A. Macdonald’s influence on Canadian economic history through the National
Policy. The National Policy combined three core elements- infrastructure, tariffs, and
population growth (Boas 64). It was Macdonald’s strategy to reshape and expand the
country. A key aspect of the National Policy was the elimination of barriers of trade
between provinces, this encouraged commerce between provinces that would foster
good relations.
Perhaps the most influential aspect of the National Policy was in the form of the
trans-continental railway. Macdonald was able to physically connect the East and West
provinces, the railway delivered manufactured goods to markets in the West and
transported colonists from the East to populate the Western provinces (Boas 65).

16

Conclusion:
After examining the relation between John A. Macdonald and his influence on the
unification of Canadian Provinces, the investigation concludes that John A. Macdonald
was a main contributing factor. Although there are other key events that have played in
unification, there is massive information pointing towards the massive influence John A.
Macdonald had. From Macdonald’s early participation in colonial leadership, to the
defusing of the political deadlock in the Province of Canada, his key leadership during
the Charlottetown, Quebec, and London conferences, and his national policies during
his time as Prime Minister it can be definitely said John A. Macdonald played a
prominent role in the unification of Canadian Provinces.

17

Works Cited
Aitchison, J. H. “Sir John A. Macdonald: Nation-Builder.” ​Canadian Journal of
Economics and Political Science​, vol. 22, no. 4, 1956, pp. 549–553.,
doi:10.2307/138715.
Arsenault, Virginia. ​The Canadian Government and Aboriginal Peoples.​ Swisspeace,
2015, pp. 11–14, ​Resistance to the Canadian Truth and Reconciliation
Commission​, www.jstor.org/stable/resrep11074.7.
Boas, Frank. “Explorations in the Dominion of Canada, 1886.” ​Science,​ vol. 11, no. 262,
1888, pp. 64–65. ​JSTOR​, www.jstor.org/stable/1763383.
Budde, Robert. “Codes of Canadian Racism: Anglocentric and Assimilationist Cultural
Rhetoric.” ​Home-Work: Postcolonialism, Pedagogy, and Canadian Literature​,
edited by Cynthia Sugars, University of Ottawa Press, Ottawa, Ont. Canada,
2004, pp. 245–256. ​JSTOR,​ www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt1ckpc18.17.
“Building the National Railways (1851 - 1885).” ​Canada in the Making - Aboriginals:
Treaties &amp; Relations​,
web.archive.org/web/20120511070834/www.canadiana.ca/citm/themes/pioneers/
pioneers9_e.html.
Canada, Library and Archives. “The Québec Conference, October 10-27, 1864.” ​Library
and Archives Canada,​ 9 Sept. 2020,
www.bac-lac.gc.ca/eng/discover/politics-government/canadian-confederation/Pag
es/quebec-conference.aspx.
Canada, Library and Archives. “The Charlottetown Conference, September 1-9, 1864.”

18

Library and Archives Canada​, 9 Sept. 2020,
www.bac-lac.gc.ca/eng/discover/politics-government/canadian-confederation/Pag
es/charlottetown-conference.aspx.
“Canadian Cultural Policy: A Problem of Metaphysics, 1999.” ​Everything Is Relevant:
Writings on Art and Life, 1991-2018​, by Ken Lum, Concordia University Press,
Montreal, 2020, pp. 44–58. ​JSTOR​, www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctvwvr2jd.17.
Chauvin, Zachary G. “A John A. Macdonald - Canada’s First Prime Minister (A Quest
Biography).” ​Resource Links,​ vol. 19, no. 1, Oct. 2013, p. 40. ​EBSCOhost​,
search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=ehh&AN=91833892&site=eho
st-live.
Decker, Leslie E. “The Canadian Pacific Railway and the Development of Western
Canada, 1860-1914 (Book).” ​American Historical Review​, vol. 96, no. 1, Feb.
1991, p. 293. ​EBSCOhost,​ doi:10.2307/2164259.
“Dominion of Canada.” ​Journal of Education,​ vol. 85, no. 26, June 1917, p. 723.
EBSCOhost​,
search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=ehh&AN=21929399&site=ehost
-live.
Gagnon, Chantal. “Ideologies in the History of Translation: A Case Study of Canadian
Political Speeches.” ​Charting the Future of Translation History,​ edited by
GEORGES L. BASTIN and PAUL F. BANDIA, University of Ottawa Press,
Ottawa, 2006, pp. 201–224. ​JSTOR,​ www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt1ckpfkh.15.

19

Kennedy, W. P. M. “The Interpretation of the British North America Act.” ​The Cambridge
Law Journal​, vol. 8, no. 2, 1943, pp. 146–160. ​JSTOR​,
www.jstor.org/stable/4503403.
Lee, Gabriel. “Report of Resolutions Adopted at a Conference of Delegates, at Québec,
October 10, 1864, as the Basis of a Proposed Confederation.” ​Documents |
Report of Resolutions Adopted at a Conference of Delegates, at Québec, October
10, 1864, as the Basis of a Proposed Confederation,​ Government of Canada,
Department of Canadian Heritage, Canadian Heritage Information Network,
www.virtualmuseum.ca/edu/ViewLoitDa.do;jsessionid=C2FE46A8DC8619A1227A
C495EDF6E830?method=preview&lang=EN&id=1754.
“Macdonald : Peter B. Waite” ​Internet Archive,​ McGraw-Hill Ryerson, 1 Jan. 1975,
archive.org/details/macdonald00pete.
McLACHLAN, R.W. “CANADIAN NUMISMATICS. PROVINCE OF CANADA
[Continued].” ​American Journal of Numismatics, and Bulletin of the American
Numismatic and Archaeological Society​, vol. 17, no. 1, 1882, pp. 9–13. ​JSTOR​,
Preece, Rod. “The Political Wisdom of Sir John A. Macdonald.” ​Canadian Journal of
Political Science / Revue Canadienne De Science Politique,​ vol. 17, no. 3, 1984,
pp. 459–486. ​JSTOR,​ www.jstor.org/stable/3227603.
Skelly, Julia. “The Politics of Drunkenness: John Henry Walker, John A. Macdonald,
and Graphic Satire.” ​RACAR: Revue D'art Canadienne / Canadian Art Review​,
vol. 40, no. 1, 2015, pp. 71–84. ​JSTOR​, www.jstor.org/stable/24327432.
“The British North America Act.” ​The American Journal of International Law​, vol. 4, no.
1, 1910, pp. 39–67. ​JSTOR,​ www.jstor.org/stable/2212267.

20

“The ‘Classical’ Bourgeois Revolutions in the History of Uneven and Combined
Development.” ​How the West Came to Rule: The Geopolitical Origins of
Capitalism​, by Alexander Anievas and Kerem Nişancioğlu, Pluto Press, London,
2015, pp. 174–214. ​JSTOR,​ www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt183pb6f.11.

Can Low Self-Esteem Develop into Clinical Depression?

Group 3: Individuals and Societies

Word Count: 3,824

by: Justin Guthrie

Table of Contents
Risk Factors of Low Self-Esteem and Clinical Depression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Modeling the Link . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Components of Clinical Depression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Biological . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Cognitive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

i

Can Low Self-Esteem Develop into Clinical Depression?
Introduction
The question of whether low self-esteem can develop into clinical depression is a
multifaceted topic that creates debates among many researchers in the contemporary
field of abnormal psychology. Among the most popular opinions, Pakriev suggests that
low self-esteem is seen as a risk factor for clinical depression, while researchers such
as Orth and Robins believe that there are more possible links between self-esteem and
depression. This essay seeks to shed light on the various risk factors for both low
self-esteem and clinical depression, and modeling the link between the two. Lastly, it
will expand on the components of clinical depression in two categories: biological and
cognitive, while examining multiple viewpoints on both the aspects of clinical depression
and the link it shares with low self-esteem. Researchers such as Pakriev theorized that
low self-esteem is a risk factor of clinical depression, therefore having the potential to
develop into clinical depression.
In contrast, researchers such as Orth and Robins model multiple possible links
between both low self-esteem and clinical depression, some of which ignore the
possibility that self-esteem is a risk factor of clinical depression (as Pakriev suggests).
To ground these viewpoints, Kashdan provides biological evidence to support the link
that self-esteem is a risk factor of clinical depression. Once the link is established, Van
Tuijl, Lee, and Hankin provide more information based on a variety of meta-analyses.

1

2

The data presents statistical evidence to support the findings of Pakriev and
Kashdan, with an emphasis on the cognitive aspect of clinical depression and how it
relates to self-esteem. This research is worthy of investigation because it not only
enables a greater understanding of the topics of low self-esteem and clinical depression
but also relates to a core field of contemporary research: abnormal psychology. Since
clinical depression is a serious topic in the field of abnormal psychology, this research
can be used to enable a greater understanding of how to identify the mental illness
before it becomes too severe by evaluating the individual’s self-esteem. Moreover,
depression can occur among many people; it is not confined to a specific age group or
gender. With the frequency of depression (even across multiple populations), it provides
further support to the importance of studying it. With a link fully established between
self-esteem and clinical depression, the mental illness can be identified sooner and
treatment can begin promptly. On the topic of treatment, the methods used to treat
depression can also improve with this research by choosing to focus on the aspect of
low self-esteem in order to enhance the efficiency of the treatment. To encapsulate the
worthiness of this investigation, this research possesses a significant impact on the
treatment, diagnosis, and identification of the link between low self-esteem and clinical
depression.
Risk Factors of Low-Self Esteem and Clinical Depression
The many categorizations of the risk factors studied for both low self-esteem and
clinical depression are integral parts in the development of clinical depression across
many individuals. Among other distinctions, those risk factors can be categorized into

3

causal and pathoplastic. Causal risk factors for depression include negative elements in
close relationships, which would “increase the individual’s vulnerability to depression”
(Pakriev, et al. 29). Those negative elements could be poor communication or a
difference of interests, among other factors. By increasing the “vulnerability to
depression”, these negative factors (which could also include low self-esteem) have the
potential to be the causes of depression itself (Pakriev, et al. 29).
Meanwhile, a common pathoplastic risk factor is having “three or more young
children in the home”, which “affects self-esteem and makes current depression more
severe.” (Pakriev, et al. 29). Since pathoplastic factors make the current depression
more severe, it is less likely to be considered a cause of depression. However, there still
is a link between the pathoplastic factor and depression. By defining these factors, it
helps clarify the difference between certain risk factors that share a link with depression
and risk factors that have the potential to cause clinical depression.
Moreover, the risk factors for clinical depression can vary among different age
groups and genders. Particularly for women who have given birth or expecting, there
are a different set of risk factors that could contribute to antenatal depression or
postnatal depression. The most significant of the risk factors is low self-esteem, which
contributes to both antenatal and postnatal depression (Leigh, Milgrom 2). Low
self-esteem continuously affects the individual in this case, where the timing (before or
after labor) doesn’t affect the symptoms of low self-esteem. Nevertheless, even though
low self-esteem is the largest factor that affects both antenatal and postnatal
depression, there are other factors that contribute to both depressions.

4

For antenatal depression, other risk factors that were evaluated include “young
age, low income, . . . a history of childhood sexual abuse, . . . and low social support”
(Leigh, Milgrom 2). Antenatal depression is the depression that occurs in the weeks
leading up to the act of giving birth. The low self-esteem in this scenario is in
anticipation of having a baby. The various factors, such as low income, discourage the
wife because she may feel inadequate to handle a baby. This ideology is also found in
postnatal depression, but the main difference is the timing.
Postnatal depression risk factors include low income and a “history of childhood
sexual abuse”, as well as a history of miscarriage or antenatal depression (Leigh,
Milgrom 2). Postnatal depression is the depression that occurs after giving birth. The
low self-esteem in this scenario is the realization after labor that the new mother may
not be able to adequately handle taking care of a baby. The risk factors of postnatal
depression help solidify that line of thinking. Low self-esteem was found to be the most
influential across both antenatal depression and postnatal depression. This information
helps identify possible development of depression (regardless of timing) in mothers
expecting a baby or mothers that have recently given birth. Furthermore, this adds that
the link between low self-esteem and clinical depression exists outside of the
frequently-studied children and adolescents.
Social exclusion, an experience that may seem to be frequent when an individual
is depressed, can also play a role in identifying low self-esteem. “Low self-esteem and
low negative emotion differentiation” are often “associated with stronger activation
during social rejection . . . in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and anterior

5

insula—two regions previously shown to index social distress.” (Kashdan, et al. 1).
Essentially, an individual with low self-esteem is likely to experience social distress
when excluded socially. These negative emotions could lead to other risk factors shown
for clinical depression, along with the most significant of them all, low self-esteem itself.
Considering this viewpoint, low self-esteem has the potential to be a cause of clinical
depression. Similarly, this effect can occur with positive feedback as well.
When individuals with low self-esteem are given positive feedback (versus
negative feedback), the individuals “showed the greatest activation in the ventral
anterior cingulate cortex/medial prefrontal cortex (vACC/mPFC) in response” (Kashdan,
et al. 2). This information indicates that low self-esteem plays a role in the biased
importance of social feedback (where some feedback may be given more importance
than others). Biased feedback supports the idea that negative feedback is given more
importance than positive feedback, based on the parts of the brain activated. The
importance of negative feedback is common in individuals with low self-esteem as well
as depression. This is another concept that supports the link between low self-esteem
and clinical depression and contends that low self-esteem has the potential to develop
into clinical depression.
Although seemingly conflicting conclusions, these studies suggest that
self-esteem plays “an important role in modulating neural reactivity to information about
one’s relevant social standing.” (Kashdan, et al. 2). This neural reactivity concept is
useful in determining the biology of low self-esteem and how it can develop into
depression. Since low self-esteem plays an active role in neural reactivity, it plays a key

6

role in determining biased feedback (for example the previous study where negative
and positive feedback were given). With both low self-esteem and clinical depression
often putting more importance on negative feedback, it further develops the argument
that low self-esteem is an influential risk factor that can potentially develop into clinical
depression.
Modeling the Link
The use of various models can also help illustrate the multifaceted link between
low self-esteem and depressive symptoms. According to the vulnerability model, “low
self-esteem is a causal risk factor for depression.” (Orth, Robins 456). As a causal risk
factor, low self-esteem increases vulnerability to depressive symptoms, hence the name
“vulnerability model”. The vulnerability model illustrates one of the many ways that low
self-esteem links with clinical depression. In particular, this way of modeling the
situation positions low self-esteem as a risk factor, however arguably, this model is not
the only way to portray the link between low self-esteem and depression.
The scar model states that depressive symptoms can erode self-esteem from the
time after the first depressive episode (Orth, Robins 456). The scar model directly
contradicts the view that the vulnerability model holds. The scar model views low
self-esteem as a product of depression, as opposed to a risk factor. This thinking can be
correct, provided that the individual had relatively high self-esteem before developing
depression. However, this ideology is unlikely to occur since oftentimes individuals who
are diagnosed with depression already have low self-esteem. With the scar model, it
assumes that the lowering of self-esteem starts after the first depressive episode.

7

Instead, this process would have little effect on someone who already experienced low
self-esteem before their first depressive episode.
Although these models contradict, both of the models can occur simultaneously
with low self-esteem contributing to depressive symptoms as well as the low
self-esteem being eroded from depressive symptoms, as shown in a “reciprocal relation
model.” (Orth, Robins 456). This model is the most plausible since it considers that the
individual may have had high self-esteem or low self-esteem prior to developing clinical
depression. In addition, it still supports the ideology that low self-esteem has the
potential to be a cause of depression since it agrees with the vulnerability model. By
using the vulnerability, scar, and reciprocal relation models, more insight can be gained
on the patient and the link between depressive symptoms and low self-esteem that may
be present for them. With that insight, efficient prevention (or at least, mitigation) of the
depressive symptoms can take place.
Additionally, it is also worth expanding on the bilateral relationship between low
self-esteem and clinical depression, based in the context of the very definition of
self-esteem. Self-esteem can be defined as “an individual’s subjective evaluation of his
or her worth as a person.” (Orth, Robins 455). With the failure to satisfy that desire, it
can be experienced as depressing for humans. However, the relationship works both
ways. One of the major symptoms of clinical depression is a negative outlook on life:
views that people are selfish, and the individual’s future is hopeless. With that negative
outlook on life, similar attitudes act on the self, which suggests that clinical depression
also causes low self-esteem. Understanding this double-edged way of thinking is

8

important to efficiently identify the concepts of low self-esteem and clinical depression
as well as gaining insight on how to prevent severe depressive symptoms.
Components of Clinical Depression
Biological
Biology is a major component of depression and can influence various situations
depending on the part of the brain that is influenced. One of the areas commonly
affected in the brain is the NACSh. Biologically, patients with depression may
experience that their levels of “dopamine, serotonin and their metabolites” in the
NACSh, the nucleus accumbens shell responsible for the reward system in humans,
was decreased (Ruda-Kucerova, Jana, et al. 524). This essentially means that there is
a decrease in the feeling of achievement and happiness one feels when they are
rewarded (which occurs in the NACSh). Patients with depression often feel this
diminishing effect as a result of decreased levels of dopamine and serotonin, among
other neurotransmitters. Because of the decreases in the neurotransmitter levels, this
can closely resemble the feelings of negative feedback that is often prioritized over
positive feedback when an individual has low self-esteem. However, this information
regarding the biology of depression can also provide more insight on how to identify
symptoms of depression and can be used to further compare with the onset of low
self-esteem.
Studies have shown a consistent commonality between low self-esteem and
depression: the dACC, or dorsal anterior cingulate cortex. When comparing a control
group to a “low trait self-esteem group”, the “low trait self-esteem group showed more

9

activation in the dACC”, with no regions in the brain showing “greater activation in the
high trait self-esteem group relative to the low trait self-esteem group.” (Onoda, et al.
388). Essentially, individuals with low self-esteem experience more activation in the
dACC part of the brain. The dACC (dorsal anterior cingulate cortex) itself is responsible
for tasks from motor control to being principally involved in the body’s rewards system.
By investigating the dACC, it provides further insight into the rewards system of the
brain and how it is affected by low self-esteem and the development of clinical
depression. This research can be used to help biologically identify the onset of low
self-esteem and compare it to concentrations of glutamate to determine whether
depression is developed from the onset of low self-esteem. Another study found that
patients with clinical depression (modeled with an olfactory bulbectomy in rats) show
higher concentrations of glutamate than the control group (Ruda-Kucerova, et al. 525).
This argument stands because although the study was done on rats and not humans,
the olfactory bulb (used for the sense of smell) in humans also contains the
neurotransmitter glutamate. Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter that plays a role
in learning. In this case, the levels of glutamate can be compared with the activation of
the dACC in order to determine the development of clinical depression from the onset of
low self-esteem.
Another study concluded “that the effect of glutamate concentrations in the dACC
on delay discounting is mediated by functional connectivity of the dACC with the
midbrain.” (Schmaal, et al. 553). This study refers to the fact that the dACC has a
connection to higher concentrations of glutamate. The previous studies focused on

10

dACC activation in individuals with low self-esteem and increased glutamate in patients
with depression. By identifying the link between dACC (responsible for the body’s
rewards system) and glutamate production (responsible for learning), it suggests that
there is a biological link between low self-esteem and clinical depression. These
findings show significance because many severe psychiatric disorders (such as
depression) have biomarkers associated with these types of “spontaneous intrinsic
brain processes” (Schmaal, et al. 553). In summary, these studies can help to identify
the onset of low self-esteem biologically and compare it to the biological effects that the
development of depression holds.
Cognitive
By studying meta-analyses with a focus on cognitive processes, a different
perspective is formed when more light is shed on the link between low self-esteem and
clinical depression. One meta-analysis suggests that those who experience
mood-reactive self-esteem had significantly increased depressive symptoms over a
three week period, after being controlled for baseline depression (Clasen, et al. 10). In
this case, mood-reactive self-esteem is “a pattern of cognitive reactivity where low
self-esteem is temporally dependent on levels of sadness” (Clasen, et al. 1). With the
close relation mood-reactive self-esteem has to low self-esteem, the study supports the
effect low self-esteem can have on developing clinical depression. By controlling for
baseline depression, already-existing depression can be removed from the equation,
therefore increasing the validity of the study. Mood-reactive self-esteem can be virtually
indistinguishable from low self-esteem, in spite of mood-reactive self-esteem being

11

temporarily dependent on the mood of the individual. For instance, whenever the
individual is sad, the mood-reactive self-esteem resembles low self-esteem (with
various characteristics such as prioritizing the importance of negative feedback over
positive feedback). Since someone who is clinically depressed often experiences
feelings of sadness, there can be a close link between low self-esteem characteristics
and clinical depression based on the form mood-reactive self-esteem assumes when
the individual is feeling sad. This new perspective provides another way of assessing
low self-esteem and depression, even if the individual does not appear to have
traditionally low self-esteem (because they experience mood-reactive self-esteem).
Even with multiple age groups and genders, the link between low self-esteem
and clinical depression still stands. One study found that mothers with low self-esteem
experienced more postpartum depression than mothers with high self-esteem (I., et al.
105). Specifically, there was a higher concentration of mothers who had postpartum
depression and low self-esteem than with high self-esteem (with average
concentrations of 13.51 and 1.38 respectively) (I., et al. 110). This data suggests that
low self-esteem had an impact on postpartum depression, which expands the
significance of these findings (and the sample space) to more than children and
adolescents. Cognitively, this information suggests that individuals with depression
involve similar thinking as individuals with low self-esteem, which further strengthens
the link between low self-esteem and clinical depression. By expanding the sample
spaces, this study allows for more extensive research to be conducted on women with

12

postpartum depression to determine the strength of the link between low self-esteem
and clinical depression.
In another study, self-esteem was compared across patients who had depression
at that time, those with remitted depression (1-6 months since last depressive episode
ended) and those who have recovered from depression (6 months-7 years since last
depressive episode ended) (Van Tuijl, et al. 815). The results from this study show that
those who had depression at that time had an average global self-esteem level of
26.13, as opposed to the control group who had global self-esteem levels of 35.18 (Van
Tuijl, et al. 815). To clarify, global self-esteem is a representation of self-esteem and
was determined through the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. This study is intriguing
because it portrays the decline of self-esteem over time while conducting the study at
one point in time. When assessing the control group, the levels of self-esteem were
found to be higher than those who were currently experiencing depression. From the
numbers, one can picture a graph of the declining self-esteem levels that one
experiences when developing clinical depression. Additionally, the study also
categorizes multiple different time frames for depression: current, remitted, and
recovered. The detail put into the study increases it’s validity while providing more
information on the self-esteem levels of someone treated for depression.
It is also worth noting that those who have recovered from depression (their last
depressive episode ended 6 months to 7 years ago from the time of the study) have
higher levels of self-esteem than those who had depression at the time of the study. In
the study, those who have recovered from depression had average levels of

13

self-esteem at 32.45 (Van Tuijl, et al. 815). These levels are greater than the levels of
those who had depression at the time of the study, yet still not as high as the control
group. This information suggests that self-esteem is lower when someone is
experiencing depression than when someone has recovered from depression or has
never experienced depression (control group). This concept illustrates an interesting
finding that the individuals who have recovered from depression have self-esteem levels
more than the people currently experiencing depression, yet less than the control group.
This comparison suggests that even after the depression has been treated, the low
self-esteem the individual experienced when they were experiencing depression (and
through its development) still lingers. This information can be used in further research
studies to evaluate the treatment of depression and the value of treating low
self-esteem while treating clinical depression.
One study used a longitudinal analysis to determine the causation of depression
using low self-esteem. The researchers surveyed adolescents over a period of time and
evaluated the predictors of attachment styles, low self-esteem, and depression. The
researchers found a link between low self-esteem and depressive symptoms where
prospective changes in low self-esteem at T3 (where the total sample size was 308)
predicted prospective elevations of T4 depressive symptoms (where the sample size
was 345) after controlling for initial depression (Lee, Hankin 225). In fact, there was a
-.26 correlation between the two events, which was the strongest indicator of
depression aside from initially having depressive symptoms (Lee, Hankin 225). To
clarify, the “T3” and “T4” represent the different sample sizes of each group assessed.

14

This research crystallizes the strength of the link between low self-esteem and
depression with a correlation coefficient (-.26) to support the claim. Additionally, the
study controlled for baseline depression (which eliminated the factor of an individual
already experiencing depression) in order to further validate the experiment. Because of
this strong correlation between low self-esteem and depressive symptoms, one can
predict depressive symptoms changing with changes in low self-esteem. This research
can have future implications when determining the strength of the link between low
self-esteem and clinical depression. In addition, this research can examine multiple risk
factors and causes of depression and evaluate their importance in the development of
depression (since multiple factors were included in the study).
Conclusion
The research question originally asked: Can low self-esteem develop into clinical
depression? Most sources (such as Pakriev, Lee and Hankin, and Van Tuiji) agree with
this statement with the idea that there is a clear and definitive link to clinical depression
from low self-esteem. Their evidence is plentiful, while also considering both the
biological and cognitive aspects of clinical depression and low self-esteem. On the
contrary, one study (Orth and Robins) argued that there are multiple possible links
between self-esteem and depression. Although there were multiple links suggested and
modeled, the concept that low self-esteem was a risk factor for clinical depression still
remained. An example of this was shown in the “reciprocal relation model” (Orth, Robins
456). With low self-esteem as a risk factor, it therefore had the potential to develop into
clinical depression.

15

Still, there were some limitations to the sources selected. The main limitation was
the uniqueness of humanity. With each individual’s experiences unique in their own
way, it can be difficult to quantify them. However, with multiple individuals surveyed of
different backgrounds, ages, and genders, steps can be made to validify the statistics
presented even with the uniqueness that is the human condition. Furthermore, one of
the unresolved questions involved clarifying the difference between clinical depression
versus depressive symptoms. In this situation, the sources used refers to both instead
of only clinical depression. Nevertheless, it is important to note that “depression” refers
to depressive symptoms which easily develop into clinical depression. The main
difference is the diagnosis versus the symptoms specifically. High self-esteem was also
included in some sources as opposed to only low self-esteem. This inclusion wouldn’t
make too much of a difference in the response to the research question since when
high self-esteem was used (particularly in the Onada and I. studies), it was used as a
comparison to low self-esteem or as a control group.
In the essay, biological factors were considered (such as the parts of the brain
activated in both individuals with low self-esteem and clinical depression). In addition,
cognitive factors were also evaluated (such as the concept of mood-reactive
self-esteem). Comparing those factors with the risk factors presented allows for a
complete and complex understanding of how low self-esteem and clinical depression
are linked. To summarize, although there are many different views on the link between
self-esteem and clinical depression, the combination of biological, cognitive, and risk
factors show that low self-esteem has the potential to develop into clinical depression.

16

Bibliography
Clasen, Peter C., et al. “Mood-Reactive Self-Esteem and Depression Vulnerability:
Person-Specific Symptom Dynamics via Smart Phone Assessment.” ​PLoS ONE,​
vol. 10, no. 7, July 2015, pp. 1–16. ​EBSCOhost​,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0129774.
I., Onyemaechi Chinwe, et al. “Postpartum Depression: The Role of Self-Esteem, Social
Support and Age.” ​IFE PsychologIA​, vol. 25, no. 2, July 2017, pp. 105–115.
EBSCOhost​,
search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=a9h&AN=125918169&site=eh
ost-live.
Kashdan, Todd B., et al. “Who Is Most Vulnerable to Social Rejection? The Toxic
Combination of Low Self-Esteem and Lack of Negative Emotion Differentiation
on Neural Responses to Rejection.” ​PLoS ONE,​ vol. 9, no. 3, Mar. 2014, pp. 1–8.
EBSCOhost​, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0090651.
Lee, Adabel, and Benjamin L. Hankin. “Insecure Attachment, Dysfunctional Attitudes,
and Low Self-Esteem Predicting Prospective Symptoms of Depression and
Anxiety during Adolescence.” ​Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent
Psychology​, vol. 38, no. 2, Mar. 2009, pp. 219–231. ​EBSCOhost​,
search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=eric&AN=EJ833104&site=eho
st-live.

17

Leigh, Bronwyn, and Jeannette Milgrom. “Risk Factors for Antenatal Depression,
Postnatal Depression and Parenting Stress.” ​BMC Psychiatry,​ vol. 8, Jan. 2008,
pp. 1–11. ​EBSCOhost,​ doi:10.1186/1471-244X-8-24.
Onoda, Keiichi, et al. “Does Low Self-Esteem Enhance Social Pain? The Relationship
between Trait Self-Esteem and Anterior Cingulate Cortex Activation Induced by
Ostracism.” ​Social Cognitive & Affective Neuroscience​, vol. 5, no. 4, Dec. 2010,
pp. 385–391. ​EBSCOhost​, doi:10.1093/scan/nsq002.
Orth, Ulrich, and Richard W. Robins. “Understanding the Link Between Low
Self-Esteem and Depression.” ​Current Directions in Psychological Science,​ vol.
22, no. 6, 2013, pp. 455–460. ​JSTOR​, www.jstor.org/stable/44318705.
Pakriev, Sergei, et al. “Causal and Pathoplastic Risk Factors of Depression: Findings of
the Tampere Depression Project.” ​Nordic Journal of Psychiatry,​ vol. 56, no. 1,
Feb. 2002, pp. 29–32. ​EBSCOhost​, doi:10.1080/08039480252803882.
Ruda-Kucerova, Jana, et al. “Reward Related Neurotransmitter Changes in a Model of
Depression: An in Vivo Microdialysis Study.” ​World Journal of Biological
Psychiatry,​ vol. 16, no. 7, Oct. 2015, pp. 521–535. ​EBSCOhost​,
doi:10.3109/15622975.2015.1077991.
Schmaal, Lianne et al. “The Association between Cingulate Cortex Glutamate
Concentration and Delay Discounting is Mediated by Resting State Functional
Connectivity.” ​Brain and behavior​ vol. 2,5 (2012): 553-62. ​EBSCOhost​,
doi:10.1002/brb3.74

18

Van Tuijl, Lonneke A., et al. “Self-Esteem Instability in Current, Remitted, Recovered,
and Comorbid Depression and Anxiety.” ​Cognitive Therapy & Research,​ vol. 42,
no. 6, Dec. 2018, pp. 813–822. ​EBSCOhost,​ doi:10.1007/s10608-018-9926-5.

TO WHAT EXTENT DID INTERREGIONAL TRADE NETWORKS
HELP FACILITATE THE SPREAD OF THE BLACK
DEATH FROM 1347 TO 1351?

History

Word Count: 3,733

1

Table of Contents
Introduction into Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
The Spread Across Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Role of Other Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

2

Between the 8th century B.C.E. and the 6th-century C.E, transcultural trade
networks connected the major classical civilizations. After the fall of the Roman Empire
in 476 C.E., Europe split into warring kingdoms. However, in Constantinople, the Roman
Empire continued in the form of the Byzantines (Emery). In 541 C.E., a plague
remarkably similar to the Black Death struck under the reign of Justinian. Trade
between Europe and the rest of the world then noticeably declined. There were only
local trade routes, and once prosperous cities were reduced to rundown towns. The
Crusades, which started in 1095, was the primary factor that led to cross-cultural trade
revival. In the process of retaking the Holy Land from the Seljuk Turks, Europeans
"discovered new markets, commodities, artisanal products, and trade routes [leading] to
a growth in demand for foreign goods in Europe" (Jackson). To meet these needs, a
merchant class emerged, and Italian ports thrived. Trading posts were being established
in the Middle East in addition to the reopening of roads to China and India. The
characteristics that international trade was taking on echoed those of the Classical Era
before the Plague of Justinian came upon the Byzantine Empire. Not long afterward, the
Black Death would ravage Europe, this time on a much larger scale. The common
element of trade routes in the Plague of Justinian and the Black Death brings up the
question: To what extent did interregional trade networks help facilitate the spread of the
Black Death from 1347 to 1351 in Europe?

3
To answer this question, the investigation will explore how the plague was
introduced to Europe and how it traveled upon its entry. Some commonly cited factors
that have increased the spread of the Black Death, such as malnutrition, poor
sanitation, effective vectors, and different strains of the disease, will also be examined.
An attempt was made to employ a combination of first-hand accounts and secondary
sources to understand and analyze the plague's widespread nature. Understanding the
impact of increasing globalization in terms of disease is crucial to modernity and the
avoidance of disasters as severe as the Black Death, especially amid the COVID-19
pandemic that is taking place when this paper was written.

Introduction into Europe
The global trade networks in the 1300s caused people to first come into contact with the
plague that was previously isolated to Asia's rodent population. The Mongol unification
of the Eurasian steppe brought countless individuals within the proximity of some of the
most virulent and isolated plague foci in the world. Around 1300, a new route along the
northern steppe gained popularity; however, this path held a danger unbeknownst to
travelers: "it skirted the tarabagan colonies of Siberia, Mongolia, and northwest China"
(Hirst 189). The plague was able to leap from Asian rodents, such as tarabagans, to
rats, which are attracted to the resources that humans carry. The rodent carriers could
now be "transported to far away places by caravans, marching soldiers, and riders of

4
the Mongol express" (Kelly 13). Eventually, the vectors would leave the wagon and
spread the contagion to more communities, "each time moving the infection further from
its central Asian origins" (Currie 32). It was only a matter of time until the plague would
make it to Europe. The era of pax Mongolica allowed for the spread of ideas and goods
and the bacteria responsible for millions of deaths. The increased proximity of humans
to the previously isolated rodent communities due to trade drastically raised the
chances of coming into contact with infected specimens. Without the interactions that
the Mongol Empire encouraged, Yersinia pestis, the plague bacteria, would not have
traveled far from its place of origin.
The Italians and their maritime activities then brought the plague from Asia to
Europe. In the early 1200s, "several Italian city-states set out to establish their
communities as important trading centers." They began "making voyages to places like
Egypt, Turkey, and Spain to buy and sell silks and cinnamon, jewels and slaves, wool
and timber, and much more" (Currie 24). They gradually expanded their trade networks
and sought new opportunities. Genoese merchants were attracted to the Crimean town
of Caffa due to its strategic position as a crossroads between the East and the West
and developed it into the eastern end of an important trade route (Currie 34). However,
due to its location, Caffa was besieged in 1346 by the Mongols. According to a
Genoese notary, Gabriele de' Mussis, it began with a confrontation between Italian
merchants and local Muslims in Tana, the starting point of a land route to China, which

5
resulted in the death of a Muslim. Khan Janiberg, a Mongol defender of Islam, chased
the Italians from Tana to Caffa (qtd. in Kelly 5). The Italians championed Christianity,
whereas the locals strictly practiced Islam, which was a constant point of pressure. The
rise of international trade built upon such tensions. Travel across Asia brought
Christians and Muslims closer together than ever and pitted them against one another
in a never-ending competition to obtain goods from Asia. The ideological and economic
struggle that characterized their relationship culminated in the struggle at Tana.
Soon after the Mongols' arrival, de' Mussis recounts that the "whole army was
affected by a disease which overran the Tartars and killed thousands upon thousands
every day." The disease was characterized by "swellings in the armpit or groin . . .
followed by a putrid fever" (Wheelis 973), telltale signs of the bubonic plague that had
been ravaging Asia. The downfall of the Mongol army had also sealed the fate of the
residents of Caffa. It would not be long until the pestilence would enter the Crimean port
town. There is a consensus that this event is the entry point for the Black Death into
Europe; although, its method of entry is somewhat controversial.
Based on de' Mussis' narrative, the Mongols supposedly "ordered corpses to be
placed in catapults and lobbed into the city." De' Mussis would have been an eyewitness
to the siege; the events at Caffa would not have been the first attempt at biological
warfare; catapulting bodies would have been within the technical capabilities of armies
at the time (qtd. in Wheelis 973). These facts led Mark Wheelis, a professor of

6
microbiology at the University of California, to deem de' Mussis as "a reliable source."
Conversely, historian Ole Benedictow, a professor at the University of Oslo, believes
that the catapults and flying Mongols of de' Mussis' story were possibly fabricated in
order to justify why God did not protect the good Christians of Caffa (because the skyful
of corpses served as a distraction). This assumption casts some doubt on the validity of
de Mussis' account. Like most other historians, Benedictow believes that the plague
moved into the port through infected rats (Kelly 9).
The disagreement about whether or not the Mongols catapulted disease-ridden
corpses into Caffa is an argument about the method in which the disease entered the
city. If the bodies were not thrown in, Y. pestis would most likely have crept in hidden
inside of infected rats, the theory that professor Benedictow has confidence in. The
alternative would be if Khan Janibeg did unleash biological warfare on Caffa. Professor
Wheelis argues that the catapult scenario is highly probable, which leads him to support
the idea that the plague was spread to the residents of Caffa through direct contact. He
adds that "such transmission would have been especially likely at Caffa, where
cadavers would have been badly mangled by being hurled, and many of the defenders
probably had cut or abraded hands from coping with the bombardment" (973). This line
of thought places transmission through contact with infected material as the primary
method of transmission. In medieval times, besiegers would camp at least a kilometer
away from their target; so, the rat communities associated with the besieging armies

7
would not have made contact with residents inside Caffa's walls as they rarely venture a
few meters from their nests (Wheelis 974).
The siege of Caffa is focused upon due to the controversy over how the plague
entered Europe. The aim is to prove that no matter the method of dissemination,
through rats, direct contact, or even a combination of both, the plague was only brought
to Caffa because of trade routes. First, the spark that drove the Mongols to attack Caffa
resulted from tensions between Italian merchants and local Muslims. These two groups
would never have made contact if not for the cross-cultural exchanges prevalent in the
1300s. Furthermore, the road from Tana to Caffa only existed due to the development of
trade routes from Europe to Asia, which allowed for the Tartar forces to descend upon
the trading port rapidly and ultimately infect the inhabitants with the plague. In both
theories of how Y. pestis infiltrated the walls of Caffa, the plague was there in the first
place due to the trading network encompassing Eurasia.

The Spread Across Europe
In the 14th century, a surge in agricultural productivity caused Europe's population to
grow exponentially between 1000 and 1250 ("Demography" 141), leading to an
unprecedented increase in international interactions. The Atlantic and Mediterranean
regions were linked by land routes and dozens of new regional trade networks in
Flanders, Germany, Champagne, and many more areas. The rise of commerce did

8
much good for many Europeans, improving the standard of living for many and
introducing newfound luxuries from a foreign land. However, merchants' relative ease in
traveling foreshadowed just how easily Y. pestis would be able to progress from Caffa.
In the spring of 1347, Genoese tradespeople prepared to return home to Italy
after the Tartar army departed from Caffa. As they loaded their ships, infected rats
secretly slipped on board, en route to Western Europe. From there on out, historians
have many varying accounts on the exact path of the plague. According to Kelly, the
sailors first headed for Sicily (23). By the time the ships arrived, most crew members
were already dead. Even the ones that had managed to survive were "carrying such a
disease in their bodies that if anyone so much as spoke with one of them, he was
infected . . . and could not avoid death" (Biraben 50). Another account from Benedictow
claims that after Genoese ships left Caffa, their first European stops were Marseille,
Florence, and Venice. All three of the Italian ports mentioned, Sicily, Florence, and
Venice, were well-known for being huge maritime trading hubs in the medieval world,
with hundreds of merchant ships docking and setting sail daily to ports along the coast
of Europe. The high levels of activity in these cities spread the plague at a rapid rate.
The other major city was Marseille, which was mentioned above in Benedictow's
claims. From the French port town, the pestilence advanced simultaneously along the
Mediterranean coast to Spain and up to northern France, where it spread to encompass
northern Spain and England (Benedictow 46-48). The ships that left the coast of France

9
transmitted Y. pestis westward, along the southern coast of Spain. Marseille was
especially significant in dispersing the plague westward. Kelly's retelling also supports
the claim that Marseille was a chief center in passing along the pestilence. He states
that after the plague's first stop in Sicily, the infection then made its way to Marseilles,
proliferated across France, crossed the channel to England, and continued its rampage
in Wales, England, and Ireland. With the addition of Marseille to Sicily, Florence, and
Venice, the bubonic plague was ready to be delivered to nearly every trading port in
Europe.
The presence of trade routes most certainly was the cause of the majority of the
spread of the plague in Europe. A fundamental similarity between the two is the arrival
of Genoese ships from Caffa to major European port cities, in both Kelly and
Benedictow's version. The four central cities of Sicily, Florence, Venice, and Marseille
were among the first to be afflicted because they had large ports, and the infected ships
from Caffa were merchant ships. The Italian and French trading hubs were essential in
spreading the plague because port cities were the most well-connected places in the
Middle Ages.
Both accounts by Kelly and Benedictow are summaries that include neither the
full journey of Y. pestis nor all the details. While the retellings of the Black Death route in
Europe by Kelly and Benedictow represent only the perspectives of two historians, they
will serve as samples to analyze the role of trade networks in disseminating the plague

10
in Europe. These two historians were selected because their respective narratives
portray contrasting opinions, contributing to a more nuanced and varied argument.
Though merchant ships could efficiently transport infected specimens along the
coast, it was not an option in transmitting the disease inland, which is where land routes
took over. In Kelly's retelling, the bubonic plague migrated from Marseille up to Avignon,
then Paris, where it forked. One strain headed to Tournai on the Flemish border, and the
other strain headed toward Calais, overlooking the channel to England. The additional
strain that entered Genoa hit Florence, Siena, and Perugia in Italy (Kelly 24-25).
Benedictow, however, maintains that from Marseille, the plague moved to Lyons, then
Bordeaux, where it moved into northern Spain and northern France (Benedictow 46).
The towns mentioned by both historians are all situated along major overland routes
that crisscross Europe. The location of these cities supports the theory that the plague
traveled along trade routes, which would have been much faster to travel across than
footpaths, increasing the rate of dispersion of the plague. These paths also had access
to the large cities where Y. pestis would have thrived, infecting exponentially more
people to spread the Black Death. In Asia, the plague moved in a nearly identical
fashion to the description above, hitching rides in the caravans of traveling merchants
and infecting each town that happened to be along the way. It is very plausible that Y.
pestis would be disseminated across Europe in the same way, given the same scenario
(traveling merchants and trade networks).

11
The fear that was generated within the residents of infected cities increased the
spread of the plague. An unknown witness wrote about the outbreak in Messina, a city
in Sicily, saying that upon "realizing what a deadly disaster had come to them, the
people quickly drove the Italians from their city. However, the disease remained, and
soon death was everywhere" (qtd. in Lynette 7). The reaction to force the sailors who
brought the disease away only spread the plague farther and faster. The reality was that
"the continued wanderings of the ships no doubt spread the plague even farther" (Currie
38). Trade ships gave the locals a fast way to chase sailors out, but their actions also
provided the plague bacteria an easy path to the rest of Europe. Had the original ships
from Caffa stayed in the cities they arrived in, eventually, the infected rodents and
sailors would have died there, and perhaps the plague would not have spread so
rapidly.

Role of Other Factors
The population of Europe was already weakened due to the constant specter of hunger.
French writer Simon de Couvin observed that "one who is poorly nourished by
substantial food fell victim to the merest breath of the disease" (qtd. in Herlihy and Cohn
33). However, some historians question the link between malnutrition and the plague.
They point out that there were places where Black Death losses were not severe,
despite a recent history of famine. To address these claims, "areas that lost large

12
numbers of children in the famine should have suffered less during the Black Death
because they had fewer vulnerable adults in the population," which is supported by the
example of Flanders. This city lost a significant number of children during the Great
Famine but experienced fewer plague deaths than their neighbors (Kelly 64). With the
exception of cities like Flanders, the residents of most other medieval cities were
severely weakened by famine, which would have "devastating long-term effects on the
future well being of human infants" (Jordan 186). Inferentially, children during times of
famine lacked proper immune system development and, therefore, were left with a
lifelong susceptibility to disease (Moore 1089). Medieval Europe's inadequate food
supply before the Black Death resulted in the large number of individuals affected by the
Black Death. Malnutrition increased the number of carriers, therefore, increasing the
spread of the plague.
The dismal conditions of medieval Europe contributed toward the rapid outbreak
of Y. pestis among inhabitants. In urban environments, "a combination of people, rats,
flies, waste, and garbage concentrated inside a few square miles of town wall . . . made
the medieval city a human cesspool" (Leguay 5). The countryside, where 90 percent of
the population lived, was perhaps even more dangerous. The rat-to-person ratio in
peasant homes tended to be very high so that a single-family would find itself the target
of an entire rodent colony (Benedictow 33). The filth and close living quarters of
European inhabitants set the stage for the plague to be quickly dispersed from vectors

13
to human hosts. Personal hygiene practices worsened the effects of the plague, as
demonstrated by the words of St. Benedict, an influential church leader. He proclaimed,
"to those who are well, and especially to the young, bathing shall seldom be permitted"
(qtd. in Currie 18). The lack of sanitation in all parts of the continent was a contributing
factor in the dispersal of the plague within cities and led to the conditions that allowed
vectors to work efficiently.
The effectiveness of the vectors also increased the spread of the plague. While
the bacteria, Y. pestis, originated in the wild rodent population in Asia's remote steppes,
the most significant vectors were the common rat, Rattus rattus, and the rat flea,
Xenopsylla cheopis. Rats often dwell near settlements, so they are "far more likely than
a marmot or a ground squirrel to bring the plague bacillus into close contact with
humans" (Currie 31). The closer the bacteria are to humans, the more likely it will be
transmitted from the rat by the rat flea. Even without a host, X. cheopis can survive long
enough to travel hundreds of miles to find a new one. Plague bacilli create a blockage in
the foregut, making it constantly hungry and causing it to bite frequently, vomiting
plague bacilli into a new victim each time (Brubaker 2040), so inflected fleas are truly
effective vectors.
Since Y. pestis is originally a rodent disease, the number of rats dramatically fell
in the Middle Ages as more and more were infected. For X. cheopis, this decrease
meant that it had to transition to humans. The switch from rats to humans effectively

14
spread the plague among the human population as fleas were common in medieval
Europe, mostly due to the aforementioned poor hygiene. Additionally, there was also
another species of flea, Pulex irritans, that many French scholars believe medievalists
have underestimated the role of. Some researchers believe the bite of P. irritans, or the
human flea, "[contains] too few bacilli to transmit plague effectively, but it is a flea that
"is resistant to air drag, naturally targets humans, and could infect the local rat
population" (Brubaker 2044). The presence of the human flea would most definitely
contribute to the quick spread of the plague, especially in addition to European cities'
poor hygiene. X. cheopis, R. rattus, and P. irritans are all vectors that live in close
proximity to humans and would have effectively disseminated Y. pestis.
The different strains of Y. pestis may have increased the contagiousness of the
plague. The most common form of the disease was bubonic, characterized by large,
black swellings in the armpit and groin area, spread by rats and fleas. This version can
develop into the far more lethal forms of pneumonic and septicemic plague, with
mortality rates of 95-100% and 100%, respectively. The pneumonic strain allowed the
disease to "[break] free of the flea connection and [spread] into the population like a
cold or flu -- through the air" (Kelly 22). One Sicilian chronicler wrote that "breath spread
the infection among those speaking together "and along with the victims "died not only
everyone who talked with them but also anyone who had acquired or touched or laid
hands on their belongings" (qtd. in Kelly 22). The reliability of this account stands to be

15
doubted as medieval sources often exaggerate. However, it seems to be rooted in truth
as the pneumonic plague was widespread in Italy in the first year of the Black Death.
The pneumonic strain's ability to disperse from person to person would allow for the
plague to be spread exponentially faster.
The septicemic strain is characterized by "the massive amounts of plague bacilli
directly into the blood system [that] creates such toxicity that even insects normally
incapable of transmitting Y. pestis, such as body lice, can become disease vectors"
(Kelly 22). With more vectors, ubiquitous ones like body lice, the plague would be able
to spread far faster and farther. The only saving grace was that the septicemic strain
was extremely fast-acting, with the average survival time from onset of symptoms to
death being 14.5 hours. Hence, the chances of those infected spreading the bacilli were
minimal.

Conclusion
The Mongol facilitation of communication across Asia and Eastern Europe, combined
with European merchants' ambition to obtain exotic goods, are two principal factors that
brought the plague to Europe. With the constant exchange of people across trading
networks, the disease was able to gain a foothold in countless communities and widen
its reach, eventually crossing into the European threshold. Once the bacilli reached
Europe, land and sea routes facilitated the Black Death's rapid spread across virtually

16
every region on the continent. Without the presence of medieval trade networks, Europe
would not have been nearly as interconnected, and the plague would not have had an
effective means to proliferate.
Of course, trade routes were not the only factor contributing to the broad scope
of the plague in Europe. Additional elements also accelerated the spread of Y. pestis.
Malnutrition did increase the population's susceptibility to contracting the plague but did
not directly transmit the disease. Poor sanitation and efficient vectors worked together
to proliferate the disease within cities. Different forms of the plague increased the rate of
spread, but alone, it would not have been able to spread the Black Death across all of
Europe. Commerce facilitated by the extensive trade network in the Middle Ages was a
significant factor in spreading the Black Death in Europe. However, it was assisted by a
multitude of other aspects of the period. After a thorough examination, the investigation
has concluded that trade was the leading cause of the Black Death's widespread nature
across the entirety of Europe. Though, malnutrition, poor sanitation, effective vectors,
and multiple disease strains helped the Black Death spread rapidly on the local level.

17
Bibliography
Benedictow, Ole J. “The Black Death.” History Today, vol. 55, no. 3, Mar. 2005, pp.
33-34, 42–49. EBSCOhost,
search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=a9h&AN=16350177&site=eho
st-live.
Biraben, Jean-Noël. Les Hommes Et La Peste En France Et Dans Les Pays européens
Et méditerranéens. Vol. 1, Mouton, 1975. pp. 49-55.
Brubaker, Robert R. “Yersinia Pestis.” Molecular Medical Microbiology, edited by M
Sussman, Academic Press, 2001, pp. 2033–2058.
Currie, Stephen. The Black Death. ReferencePoint Press, 2013.
“Demography,” in The Dictionary of the Middle Ages. p. 141.
Emery, Kathryn Meyers. “Plague of Justinian: Older Brother of the Black Death.”
Brewminate, Brewminate, 28 Dec. 2016,
brewminate.com/plague-of-justinian-older-brother-of-the-black-death/.
Herlihy, David, and Samuel Kline Cohn. The Black Death and the Transformation of the
West. Harvard University Press, 2001.
Hirst, L. Fabian. The Conquest of Plague. A Study of the Evolution of Epidemiology, Etc.
Oxford, 1953. p. 189.

18
Jackson, Greg. “European History Questions and Answers.” Enotes.com, Enotes.com,
www.enotes.com/homework-help/what-factors-led-revival-trade-western-europe314199. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Jordan, William Chester. The Great Famine: Northern Europe in the Early Fourteenth
Century. ACLS History E-Book Project, 2005. p. 186)
Kelly, John. The Great Mortality. HarperCollins, 2005.
Leguay, Jean-Pierre. La Rue Au Moyen Age. Editions Ouest-France, 1984.
Lynette, Rachel. Bubonic Plague. KidHaven Press, 2005. pp. 7- 8.
Moore, S. E., and A. C. Cole, et al. “Prenatal or Early Postnatal Events Predict
Infectious Deaths in Young Adulthood in Rural Africa.” International Journal of
Epidemiology, vol. 28, no. 6, Dec. 1999. pp. 1088–1095.
Wheelis, Mark. “Biological Warfare at the 1346 Siege of Caffa.” Emerging Infectious
Diseases, vol. 8, no. 9, Sept. 2002, pp. 971–975. EBSCOhost,
doi:10.3201/eid0809.010536.

TO WHAT EXTENT DID CLASSIST PREJUDICES CAUSE THE POOR TO BECOME
DISPROPORTIONATELY TARGETED BY THE AMERICAN
EUGENICS MOVEMENT DURING THE
20TH CENTURY?

Group 3: Individuals and Societies

Word Count: 4000

Table of Contents
Classist Prejudices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Flawed Methodology​ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ​. ​7
Racist Prejudices​ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ​ ​1​2
Conclusion​ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ​. . . . . . ​1​5
Bibliography​ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ​. . . . . ​1​6

i

To what extent did classist prejudices cause the poor to become disproportionately
targeted by the American Eugenics Movement during the 20th century?

The American Eugenics Movement emerged during the Progressive Era of the
early 20th century (Cohen 55). Eugenics is the study of methods for the selective
breeding of humans to increase desirable characteristics (Black 15). The U.S. became
the first country to practice negative eugenics, in which people with undesirable traits
were prevented from reproducing, through policies like forced isolation institutions,
immigration restriction laws, and forced sterilization laws (Black 19). Largely based on
Social Darwinist principles, the movement aimed to rid the “American race” of the
“feebleminded,” or people who were prone to immoral behavior (Bruinius 147).
American eugenics was mostly fueled by prejudices against those on the lower rungs of
the social ladder as its policies disproportionately targeted the underprivileged members
of American society, particularly the poor (Cohen 6). Thus, the following question is
raised: To what extent did classist prejudices cause the poor to become
disproportionately targeted by the American Eugenics Movement during the 20th
century?
This essay seeks to examine the role of classist prejudice created by the
changing social climate of the late 19th and early 20th centuries in encouraging the
targeting of the poor in the American Eugenics Movement. However, the influence of
1

2
flawed “scientific” methods as well as racism in targeting the poor will also be
considered.
To analyze the importance of these factors, primary accounts, particularly of
academics and professionals, were examined. Since American eugenics was an elite
movement, it was important to examine the beliefs of those in the upper class.
Historians like Black, Isenberg, and Bruinius were also referenced for historical context
as well as contemporary perspectives on the American context.
This research is worthy of investigation because the Eugenics Movement
demonstrates the damaging social consequences science could cause when applied
with little precaution. The term “eugenics” fell into disfavor after the Nazis adapted
American eugenics to create their policies of “eugenocide.” However, the concept of
improving the human race has been retranslated into today’s “human engineering.” To
prevent similar consequences in the future, it is worth examining the effects of the
contextual prejudices, like classism.
Classist Prejudices
As a handful of the rich grew wealthier while the majority of the population
became poorer during the Gilded Age, the wealthy began to view the poor as an
economic burden that needed to be removed. Traditionally, most Americans had viewed
the poor as the “less fortunate” whose pitiful condition warranted charity (Bruinius 37).
However, as the problems of the impoverished were magnified by their rapidly
increasing numbers during the Gilded Age, many of the upper class began to view the
poor more critically. In 1883, William Sumner argued in his book, ​What Social Classes
Owe to Each Other,​ that “a pauper is a person whose producing powers have fallen

3
positively below his necessary consumption” and contends that “a man who is present
as a consumer, yet who does not contribute either by land, labor, or capital to the work
of society, is a burden” (20). He therefore implies that the poor were burdens to society
because they consumed more than they could provide. As a result, the poor were
viewed more as “problems” rather than “people.” Sumner was a prominent thinker of the
age and a respected Yale professor of social science; therefore his views held a certain
prestige during this period of intellectual thought and progress, and were likely passed
on to a generation of college students who could have only afforded higher education if
they were wealthy enough to do so. Thus, his beliefs were likely widespread among
many members of the upper class. In the eyes of the elite, the economic burden of the
poor was rising exponentially as the impoverished population grew. This new
perspective of the poor was an important factor in the rise of American eugenics
because it served as a motive for the elite to restrict the number of burdensome people.
This desire to reduce the problem combined with the widespread value of efficiency that
came with the industrial nature of the Gilded Age prompted a shift in the treatment of
the poor: rather than spending more money and giving them charity, the upper class
looked for a simple and efficient solution to eliminate the problem. Since eugenics
offered this solution, the “unfit” economic burdens to society were targeted during the
Eugenics Movement.
The rising tide of impoverished people also resulted in more crime, drunkenness,
prostitution, and other behavior the upper class deemed as immoral in the urban slums,
which pushed the upper classes to target the poor. Since the poor were trapped in a
cycle of poverty and were paid extremely low wages for factory work, many of them

4
turned to these activities (O’Donnel 36). As the urban slums grew in the latter half of the
19th century, the wealthy watched in fear as crimes began to spread like a plague
(Bruinius 35). Charles Davenport, one of the fathers of the Eugenics Movement, was
appalled by the “drunkenness and disorderliness” he saw on Thames Street and called
it an “inexpressibly disgusting scene” (qtd. in Bruinius 129). Davenport’s diction reveals
a clear disgust for the rampant behavior and people he saw in the cities. It is also
important to note that as one of the leaders of the Eugenics Movement, Davenport’s
personal views held special significance in the direction of the movement. While not
necessarily representative of the views of the entire upper class, Davenport’s disgust
exemplifies another key motive for the Eugenics Movement: to eliminate the moral
defectives from the American population. Seeing as the eugenicists generally defined
“feeblemindedness” as the nebulous “hereditary malady they believed was the cause
of...immoral behavior” (Bruinius 147), they would use immoral behavior like crime and
drinking as evidence for a person’s “feeblemindedness.” Since these behaviors were
associated with the poor, the poor became primary targets of the eugenicists’ goal of
eliminating immoral behavior. Thus, the rising tide of criminality, prostitution, alcoholism,
and other such behavior caused by the expanding lower class encouraged the elite
members of society to look down upon and target the poor during the Eugenics
Movement.
The immigration quotas of the Eugenics Movement were largely motivated by
classist sentiment against the wave of immigrant poor. While the nativist sentiment
sparked by the large immigration wave from southern and eastern European countries
during the late 19th century stemmed partly from cultural differences, a large part of that

5
nativism also stemmed from the middle to upper class native-born Americans’
resentment of these immigrants’ poverty. Many states reportedly complained that they
“[had] been obliged to erect new and large buildings, and to appropriate large sums
annually for the support of the constantly increasing numbers of foreign poor” (Atwill
30). This report implies that the foreign newcomers were of an inconvenience and even
an annoyance to state governments as it claims that these issues were “complained of
throughout the whole State of New York” (30) and that they had heard of “like
complaints from other States” (30) It should be considered that the author of this report
was representing the Republican Party, and therefore the report may have political
biases. However, as one of the dominant parties of the age, and as a party of rich
business owners, the views of the Republican Party were representative of a significant
portion of the population, particularly of the upper classes. This report highlights two
main points: that the immigrants were overcrowding the cities and that they were taking
up government funds. The first point addresses how the migration of immigrants into the
inner cities would add to the plague of rampant crime and immoral behavior that the
upper class despised. The second point would have factored into their concern that the
poor were an economic burden. Therefore, the native-born upper and middle class
Americans particularly feared the consequences of immigration on the preexisting
issues of poverty in the U.S. This conclusion is further supported by the statements of
the first report of the Committee on Selective Immigration, an ​ad hoc​ panel: “Immigrants
from northwestern Europe furnish us the best material for American citizenship and for
the future upbuilding of the American race. They have higher living standards than the
bulk of southeastern Europeans; are of higher grade of intelligence; better educated;

6
more skilled; better able to understand, appreciate and support our form of government”
while “southern and eastern Europe...have been sending large numbers of peddlers,
sweatshop workers, fruit-stand keepers [and] bootblacks” (qtd. in Black 192). The
statement reveals a clear bias against the working-class immigrants that were coming
from southern and eastern Europe. Considering that this private ​ad hoc​ committee was
headed by influential individuals like Albert Johnson, a chairman of the House
Immigration Committee in Congress, these views easily translated into the immigration
quotas that would limit the number of working-class individuals in the US (Black 192).
Thus, the strict immigration quotas established during the Eugenics Movement that
limited the entry of many of the immigrant poor were in part encouraged by classism.
Classist views also encouraged eugenicists to use birth control in order to limit
the reproduction of the poor. First, it must be understood that birth control, while
arguably a movement in its own right and an extension of the feminist movement, was
used as a tool for the Eugenics Movement because of its ability to limit reproduction and
therefore selectively breed humans. In Chapter 5, “The Cruelty of Charity,” of her 1922
book titled ​Pivot of Civilization,​ Margaret Sanger condemned charity for uplifting the
poor at the expense of the upper classes. Sanger argued that the poor (who she
characterized as “human waste”) were a “burden of unthinking and indiscriminate
fecundity of others” (116). She therefore echoes the classist view that the poor were a
social burden to the rest of society while dehumanizing the poor. She believed that
philanthropy would encourage the poor to become a “menacing decree dominant”
instead of “[eliminating] the stocks that [were] most detrimental to the future of the race
and the world” (Sanger 117). Within this statement, Sanger clearly implies her intent to

7
eliminate the poor because of her classist prejudice that the poor were detrimental to
society, an implication that was realized through her advocacy for birth control for the
poor. Sanger also lists the economic costs of the “unfit,” highlighting the “terrific cost to
the community of this dead weight of human waste” (Sanger 112). It is important to
recognize that the main audience of her writing would have been the middle and upper
classes, as they would have received enough education to be able to read and
understand it. This statement appealed to and enforced the prejudices of her upper
class readers that the poor were an economic burden as well. While Sanger was far
from the only proponent of birth control and her views may not be representative of all
supporters of this submovement, Sanger was at the forefront of the birth control
movement and thus her views were extremely influential among other supporters. Thus,
birth control was supported and led by the classist prejudices that the poor were a social
and economic burden to the middle and upper classes, which further encouraged the
targeting of the poor.
Flawed Methodology
The “science” practiced during the Eugenics Movement is now widely regarded
as pseudoscience because of its flawed methodology that disproportionately targeted
certain individuals, like the poor, over others. Many eugenicists used pedigrees that
traced the lineages of families composed of paupers and criminals to justify their belief
that there existed a hereditary trait that caused poverty and criminality. In addition,
intelligence tests were used to determine who was “feebleminded” and needed to be
institutionalized or sterilized.

8
Pedigrees reinforced the upper classes’ views of the poor as burdens to society
and suggested that poverty and the immoral crimes associated with it were hereditary,
which encouraged the upper classes to seek methods to restrict the poor from
reproducing. Richard Dugdale’s ​The Jukes, a Study in Crime, Pauperism, Disease and
Heredity​ published in 1877 traced the lineages of 42 families (called “the Jukes”) with
many “criminals, beggars, vagrants and paupers” (Black 24). Dugdale calculated the
cost of welfare, imprisonment, and other such social services for these families.
Considering that most of the people who were literate were from the upper classes,
Dugdale’s readers likely consisted mainly of upper class Americans. This attention to
economic and societal cost would have appealed to the preexisting prejudices of the
upper classes that the poor were leaching off of societal resources. ​The Jukes​ was an
incredibly influential book as it was later cited by many eugenicists as evidence that
excessive pauperism and criminality were hereditary and that providing aid for these
“defectives” cost too much for society (Black 24). The popularity of this book reveals
how widespread this view of the lower classes was among the leaders of the Eugenics
Movement. However, it should be noted that while Dugdale dehumanized the paupers
and criminals of the Jukes like many of his contemporaries did, he rejected the idea that
there was a biological hereditary factor at play and instead blamed the Jukes’
pauperism and criminality on their circumstances (Black 24). Unlike those who later
cited his work, he called for reform for the social environment, not eugenics, to correct
the issue. However, his contemporaries largely ignored these ideas and instead used
his book to justify their beliefs that a hereditary defect was mostly to blame. This is
especially evident in the pedigree studies that emerged after Dugdale’s. Oscar

9
McCulloch, a Congresionalist minister of the National Conference of Charities and
Correction, studied an impoverished extended family he labeled as the “Tribe of
Ishmael'' and published his findings in his paper ​The Tribe of Ishmael: A Study in Social
Degradation​ (Cohen 50). While he agreed with Dugdale concerning the role of social
environment, he more prominently argued that the Ishmaelites’ issues of poverty and
crime were due to their “decaying stock” (qtd. in Cohen 50). He argued that they were
so degraded that government and private aid and charity from the “benevolent public”
could not cure their “generally diseased” condition, and that providing aid instead
“encouraged them” in their “idle, wandering life” and in the “propagation of similarly
disposed children'' (qtd. in Cohen 50). McCulloch may have partially blamed the social
environment, but his loaded diction reveals his classist perspective that the poor were
inferior. Characterizing his readers (once again, who were likely mostly made up of the
literate upper classes) as the “benevolent public” shows his positive bias for the upper
and middle classes who were paying for the government aid provided for the poor.
Meanwhile, he described the pauper’s life as “idle” and “wandering,” implying that the
poor were poor by will (or lack thereof) rather than by circumstance, thus justifying the
belief that the poor were genetically predisposed to poverty and crime. McCulloch also
compared the Ishmaelites to Sacculina parasites that feed off of crustaceans, which
further enforced the prejudice that the poor were leaching off of society (Black 25).
While not all members of the upper class shared his views, McCulloch presented his
paper to the Fifteenth National Conference of Charities and Correction, which meant
that his ideas became widespread particularly among those of a similar status of
political power, wealth, or scholarly renown. McCulloch’s words echo the language of

10
Sumner from the late 19th century and other influential members of the upper class that
was used to describe the poor, which reveals the influence of classism in labelling the
poor as inherently “diseased,” effectively labelling them as the main targets of the
movement.
Eugenicists used flawed tests to quantify intelligence so that they could easily
determine who was feebleminded; however, these tests largely determined who had a
proper education and who did not rather than intelligence. Lewis Terman’s famous
revision of the Binet-Simon IQ test, called the Stanford-Binet IQ test, was used to
determine who was a “moron,” and therefore dangerous to the American gene pool
(Isenberg 198). The test asked subjects to write their name and define vocabulary
words, feats that could only be accomplished by those who were literate and had
received education beyond grade school (Bruinius 43). Since the public education
system was poorly enforced and barely funded, particularly in the South where many
impoverished white Americans lived, those who relied on public education (mostly those
who were poor) did not receive sufficient education (Isenberg 198). In addition, because
many working-class families needed their children to stay home and work, many poor
Americans did not receive an education beyond grade school (Library of Congress).
Lastly, college and universities could typically only be attended by those who could
afford it, so higher education was largely restricted to the middle and upper classes
(Library of Congress). Not to mention, many of the impoverished immigrants had never
even picked up a pencil prior to the test (Isenberg 198). Thus, the lower classes were
unable to score as high on these intelligence tests due to their insufficient schooling. As

11
a result, those who were deemed “morons” by the IQ tests were often poor, making
them the prime targets of the Eugenics Movement.
However, it should be questioned whether or not there was intent in tailoring the
tests against the poor: did the tests encourage classism or did classism encourage the
tests? Considering the classist attitudes held by the upper classes shortly prior to the
movement (as discussed previously in this paper), it is possible that the latter is true.
However, this matter of intent is difficult to judge, especially when in “The Uses of
Intelligence Tests” from ​The Measurement of Intelligence,​ Terman lists poverty as a
“handicap” for some genius children (12). And yet he also states that intelligence tests
would identify “high-grade defectives,” which would then help society “[curtail] the
reproduction of feeble-mindedness” and “[eliminate]...an enormous amount of crime,
pauperism, and industrial inefficiency” (Terman 7). This makes it unclear whether he
believed that poverty was an unfortunate handicap or if poverty was inherently linked to
feeblemindedness. That being said, the tests likely encouraged classism among the
upper classes as they provided “justification” that the poor were disproportionately
feebleminded and therefore detrimental to the American gene pool. Thus, it is more
accurate to argue that while the intelligence tests used to identify the feebleminded
during the Eugenics Movement may not have been created with a classist intent to
target the poor, they likely encouraged and justified preexisting classist beliefs that the
poor were inherently detrimental to the American gene pool.
While it could be argued that not all elite members of society held the classist
belief that the poor were inherently mentally defective, this belief was still the dominant
idea of the age. In 1915, Robert Yerkes, a psychologist from Harvard University,

12
published a study in which he suggested that poor academic performance could be
affected by socioeconomic conditions (Brookwood 2). Despite his musings, this idea
was not included in the final report. Thus, while some of the highly educated may not
have completely agreed with the belief that the poor were naturally unintelligent, these
opposing thoughts were largely silenced and unpopular. Therefore, eugenicists widely
believed that the poor were inherently mentally deficient and labelled them as
“feebleminded,” making them the precise targets of the Eugenics Movement.
It should also be mentioned that African Americans were also disproportionately
targeted by these intelligence tests because they were limited to segregated schools
with inferior resources, if they had access to schools at all (Brookwood 2). However,
considering the history of slavery and segregation in the US, it is unsurprising that many
of the targeted African Americans also happened to be poor (Black 21).
Racist Prejudices
It should first be understood that race and class in America were (and arguably
still are) intertwined. Historian Edwin Black argues that “class was, in large measure,
racial and ethnic” (Black 21). After all, the history of slavery and segregation in the US
created middle and upper classes composed primarily of Anglo-Saxon Americans while
African Americans were largely confined to the lower classes (Brookwood 1-2). In
addition, many of the new immigrants of southern and eastern European racial
backgrounds were impoverished and would have joined the lower classes in America
(Black 192). It is also interesting to note that many upper class Americans had a
tendency to view the poor whites as a different race. Historian Nancy Isenberg claims
that “white trash southerners were classified as a ‘race’ that passed on horrific traits”

13
(Isenberg 136). She also claims that for both Democrats and Republicans of the late
19th century, “race could never be decoupled from class” (Isenberg 184). Thus, the
upper classes at the time also viewed race and class as inseparable. Considering this, it
can be inferred that the classist and racist motives of the dominant classes at the time
for targeting the poor were likely intertwined. The close relationship of these two factors
necessitates the discussion of the role of racist prejudices in the targeting of the lower
class as well, as this relationship suggests that many of the poor may have been
targeted not for their economic class, but for their race.
Race was a significant factor that was considered in the evaluation of whether or
not an individual was eugenic, which implies that there were racist motives in
determining who was “unfit.” The Eugenics Record Office (ERO) headed by Charles
Davenport and Harry Laughlin, the two most influential eugenicists in the US, compiled
family trait booklets and family folders to determine eugenic traits (Black 106). These
records focused on physical characteristics that were measured qualitatively, like height
(“very short, short, medium tall, very tall”), hair color (“albino, flaxen, yellow-brown, light
brown, medium brown, dark hair, black”) skin color (“blond, intermediate, brunette, dark
brown, black Negro, yellow, yellow-brown or reddish-brown”), and visual acuity (“blind,
imperfect, strong, or color blind”) (qtd. in Black 106). These recorded characteristics
imply that race was a heavily considered factor in determining whether or not a family
was “eugenic.” Considering that the goal of eugenics was, in Laughlin’s words, “to purify
the breeding stock of the race at all costs” (Laughlin 478), individuals of undesirable
races would be excluded from the eugenic ideal. It is evident, then, that racist motives

14
encouraged the Eugenics Movement to target members of “undesirable” races, who
often happened to be poor.
Many leaders of the movement also harbored racist views that fueled the call for
eugenics policies. Davenport argued in ​Hereditary Genius​ that whites were superior to
blacks, a race he claimed that was composed of “half-witted men” (qtd. in Cohen 58).
He also claimed that the Jewish were “specialized for a parasitic existence” (qtd. in
Cohen 58). These characterizations imply that specific races were deemed as unfit for
future generations. In addition, Lothrop Stoddard, a leader of the Eugenics Research
Association and later a director of the American Birth Control League, was a “race
hatred fanatic” (Black 90). Stoddard suggested in his popular book, ​The Rising Tide of
Color Against White World Supremacy,​ that “just as we isolate bacterial invasions and
starve out the bacteria by limiting the area and amount of their food-supply, so we can
compel an inferior race to remain in its native habitat…[which will] eventually limit...its
influence” (Stoddard 259-260). Stoddard’s words reveal a clearly racist motive in
eugenic policies, particularly in immigration restriction. While they are not necessarily
representative of all eugenicists, these men had incredible influence over the Eugenics
Movement as leaders of significant research organizations. It is therefore reasonable to
conclude that their prejudices influenced many other eugenicists of the age. Thus,
racism also played a significant role in the targeting of the poor during the Eugenics
Movement.
Conclusion
The original research question was: To what extent did classist prejudices cause
the poor to become disproportionately targeted by the American Eugenics Movement

15
during the 20th century? Although classism generated from the changing social climate
of the late 19th century was largely responsible for creating the animosity for the poor
that encouraged the Eugenics Movement, it was the flawed methodology that largely
identified the poor as the main targets of the movement. While the methods used to
determine who was “feebleminded” were possibly created with classist intent, it is more
accurate to argue that these methods cemented classist prejudices. However, because
of the close relationship between class and race in America, it is important to recognize
that racism also played a significant role in causing the poor to become the main targets
of the movement, as many of the poor consisted of non-Anglo-Saxon races, unlike the
largely Anglo-Saxon upper classes.

16
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Atwill, Joseph F. ​The Crisis! An Appeal to Our Countrymen, on the Subject of Foreign
Influence in the United States!​ Broadway, 1844.
Laughlin, Harry H. “Calculations on the Working Out of a Proposed Program of
Sterilization,” ​Proceedings, First National Conference on Race Betterment, 1
​ 921.
Sanger, Margaret. ​The Pivot of Civilization​. New York: Brentatno’s, 1922.
Stoddard, Lothrop. ​The Rising Tide of Color Against White World-supremacy​. Scribner,
1926.
Sumner, William Graham. ​What Social Classes Owe to Each Other.​ United States,
Harper & brothers, 1883.
Terman, Lewis. ​The Measurement of Intelligence​. Edited by Ellwood P. Cubberley, The
Riverside Press, 1916.
Secondary Sources
Black, Edwin. ​War against the Weak: Eugenics and America's Campaign to Create a
Master Race. ​Four Walls Eight Windows, 2004.
Brookwood, Marilyn. ​Eugenics, Lewis Terman, and Tests of Intelligence: One Hundred
Years and Counting.​ 2018, doi:10.13140/RG.2.1.2037.5929. Accessed 11 Dec.
2020.
Bruinius, Harry. ​Better for All the World: the Secret History of Forced Sterilization and
America's Quest for Racial Purity.​ Knopf, 2006.
Cohen, Adam.​ Imbeciles: the Supreme Court, American Eugenics, and the Sterilization
of Carrie Buck.​ Penguin Press, 2016.

17
Isenberg, Nancy. ​White Trash: The 400-Year Untold History of Class in America.​
Penguin Books, an Imprint of Penguin Random House LLC, 2016.
Library of Congress. “America at School.” ​The Library of Congress​,
www.loc.gov/collections/america-at-work-and-leisure-1894-to-1915/articles-and-e
ssays/america-at-school/.
O'Donnell, Edward T. ​Henry George and the Crisis of Inequality Progress and Poverty
in the Gilded Age​. Columbia University Press, 2017.
Okrent, Daniel. ​The Guarded Gate: Bigotry, Eugenics, and the Law That Kept Two
Generations of Jews, Italians, and Other European Immigrants Out of America.
Scribner, 2019.

﻿


TO WHAT EXTENT DID AMERICAN ATHLETES INFLUENCE SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY?


Group 3: History


Word Count: 3,966

















i
Table of Contents
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Athletes during the Fight for Racial Equality. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Female Athletes and their Role in Social Reform. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Athletes impact on Controversial Topics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Impact of the Athletes’ Social Work. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Bibliography. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16














Introduction
      As a minority tennis player in a large and competitive state, my ability to compete with all players of my level really interested me. I have a love for sports as an industry, and I felt the many stories of American star athletes and their impact on sports had to be analyzed holistically and further in depth. I understood that the sports world wasn’t always as accepting as it is today and consequently a question arose, who were monumental in evolving the sports industry. Furthermore, hearing the stories of Babe Ruth and Arthur Ashe led me to realize that not only were their respective sports changed, but the athletes’ fame and power affected society all together. One athlete that is a prime example of societal impact is Jesse Owens’s story at the 1936 Olympics in Berlin. Jesse Owens won multiple medals and in doing so, disapproved Hilter’s ideology of the Aryan race being the supreme race. In fact Jesse Owens, an African American, and many other African American athletes left the olympics with medals (Vasilev, 2009). Many say that this made the Nazi movement look bad. Although many “non-perfect” athletes were winning at the olympics, the Nazis ended the event with the most medals, causing there to be a debate on the truth and significance of the event. It is for certain that whether or not Hitler and the Nazis were discredited, the impact of an athlete with fame and success impacted the viewpoint of many. In Berlin, the crowd stood up and gave a grand standing ovation to Owens when he won, taken away by his magnificence. Similar to Owens, many athletes in the twentieth century directly impacted issues in society and the societal norms to evolve the sports world, but more importantly, to bring equality to all people and change the mindset of millions of people.
To what extent did American Athletes influence social change in the twentieth century? 


Athletes during the Fight for Racial Equality
      Athletes have influenced the fight for racial equality so that all people have the same opportunities through their excellence and ability to stand their own ground. There are many great athletes who exemplified this aspect throughout their lives and were forces in the fight for racial equality. Tennis star Arthur Ashe played a huge role in this fight and for many more social causes. Arthur Ashe is put on a pedestal as one of the greatest tennis players of all time, but his influence and legacy doesn’t only live on through his tennis career, he is also widely known for his political stances and social involvement. During his time, white men and women were against black athletes speaking their political stances, yet Ashe was very strong and always involved himself in the fight for social justice (Arnold, 2015). During a time when African Americans were still discriminated against, Ashe stood out and was a driving force for efforts towards equality. Ashe was known by many who loved tennis and was the first colored man, and only one, to ever win the Australian Open, US Open, and the Wimbledon. On top of that, Arthur Ashe excelled in education and was considered to be an all-rounded man, and a perfect model for other African Americans (Roach, 2003). Ashe fought to influence all discriminated people to be their best and to work hard when he stated, “I tell you ... racism and sexism will never be an excuse for not doing your best,” highlighting his true range of impact. His excellence in tennis, good education, and passion for social justice made him a man that many people recognized from other sports and people who don’t like sports at all. Ashe’s achievements in his tennis career made him a powerful man and caused his voice to be heard. A pro athlete of color speaking up was very rare, yet, Ashe was a powerful force that nobody could stop.	
      Jackie Robinson was a monumental baseball player who made a significant impact on racial equality, similar to Ashe. He accomplished many things as a professional baseball player, but his presence in the league and achievements caused a major change in society. He was a star athlete in four sports, served in the military, attended college, and became the first African American to stand at first base and suit up for a major league baseball game. This was a huge feat being one of America’s most popular sports and many civil rights amendments and legislations were decades away from passing. He had to play and fight through all the racist remarks and hate he received. Robinson was a superstar winning many awards starting from the rookie of the year award. Robinson’s talent in baseball brought him to a major league team and led him to break the “color barrier” that stood in a non-integrated league (“Jackie Robinson,” n.d.). Similar to Ashe, Robinson used his platform and power as an elite athlete to bring change and fight for the desegregation of the United States in various aspects. Athletes who have gained fame in the past and have struggled through social injustice like Ashe and Robinson influenced society and were a critical part of the desegregation of the United States, fighting for the rights of African Americans. These men didn’t stop at the end of their professional sports careers, but participated in human rights organizations and spoke up in a time that took a lot of courage to do so. The words of Robinson were very profound in their request for respect and positive influence. Jackie Robinson once said that “I'm not concerned with your liking or disliking me... All I ask is that you respect me as a human being.” Ashe and Robinson were influential men during a time when society didn’t treat all people equally.
      An early pioneer of African American rights was basketball legend Bill Russell. Russell played in the NBA for many years winning eleven championships, five MVPs, and he played in twelve all star games. Russell even led the American basketball team to a gold in the 1956 olympics. In 1967, he became a coach for the Boston Celtics, the first ever African American coach in the professional major sports world. Russell broke the color barrier and set himself apart by being widely known for his analytical defensive style, which reshaped basketball (“Game Makers: Bill Russell,” n.d.). Russell was considered the greatest basketball player of all time and many still consider him to be today. Furthermore, Russell became a successful basketball coach winning an NBA championship. Russell, similar to Jackie Robinson and Arthur Ashe, took his impact beyond his sport as a human rights activist. 

Female Athletes and their Role in Social Reform
      Similar to Ashe, Robinson and many other great men, female athletes played a significant role in civil rights movements. Althea Gibson left a mark in the tennis world from the start of her career and left a mark on the United States beyond her career. Gibson’s name is written in the history books and she brought fame and glory to herself and the United States as an African woman. She was the precursor African American female tennis player and paved the way for future generations such as Serena Williams and Venus Williams. Gibson was the first African woman to ever win a major championship in France, Britain, and the United States. Althea came from a poor and rough background in Harlem and faced a lot of segregation when playing tennis, yet through the help of a friend and her toughness, she was able to play with other white female tennis players (Blackwell, n.d.). The experiences of Althea and understanding the difference of life between her childhood and a popular person impacted her, eventually leading her to become the New Jersey state commissioner of athletics as an African woman. She took this role just decades after her being rejected from playing the national tournament in 1950, serving as an indicator of her influence and contribution to the change in the mindset of society. The evolution of attitude within the sports world, a major entertainment industry and part of American culture, serves to symbolize the parallel adaptation occurring in American society as a whole. Most sports were segregated through the first half of the twentieth century. Tennis was seen as a white only sport even after the integration of other sports, a major influence for tennis athletes to excel and to prove the world that they should be treated equally.
      Another African American that was driven by the inequality and injustice she faced was Wilma Rudolph, who had a major impact on African female involvement in sports in the United States. The United States and the world were shocked by Wilma Rudolph’s performance in the 1960 olympics. She won three gold medals at the olympics but more importantly, everyone saw her athleticism and charm. She gained a lot of attention from the press showing the world who Rudolph was and her impressive abilities. Followingher post-olympic fame, Rudolph once said, “ By the time I was 12 I was challenging every boy in our neighborhood at running, jumping, everything,” and that “the feeling of accomplishment welled up inside of me, three Olympic gold medals. I knew that was something nobody could ever take away from me, ever.” These statements were essentia as a bold young woman made statements of superior athleticism and nature than men and no individual could truly deny her remarks because she had her success to show for it. Though successful at the olympics and in her career, Rudolph’s impact was a lot more than interviews and her name in the history books. Rudolph being a media magnet led many young African American girls to see her and get inspired. These girls in the United States took to sports and other activities, many joining track and field. Rudolph’s effect boosted the number of African American females who participated in various sports. “At the 1984 Olympics where Black women --who accounted for only 6% of the U.S. population-- won 75% of all the track and field medals won by American women,” (Walters, 1996). Many people remember athletes and their legacy for their achievements and success, but the American athletes of the twentieth century had a heavy impact on racial inequality and the color barrier that stood in America for a long time. These athletes fought against the odds to participate in sports they loved at a professional level and used their success and popularity to advocate for racial equality when racial equality wasn’t present and the white man suppressed the colored people and their right to speak up. Similarly, the female athletes were not shy to stand up for their own rights and were just as courageous to influence women’s rights.
      
Athletes impact on Controversial Topics:
      American athletes have been monumental in the fight for social justice, not just in the fight for racial equality but also, in highly controversial topics of the time. The LGBTQ was not a widely accepted society or idea during the twentieth century and many great athletes had to face the adversity of criticism. Athletes such as Billie Jean King faced a lot of hate for being LGBTQ. Billie Jean King was a major supporter for women’s rights and equality, and was very active in social reform. Additionally, being part of the LGBTQ society, she was even more involved in reform in more sensitive areas. Billie Jean King was never afraid to stand up for her beliefs and for the equality of people. At the young age of 12, King once said, “Everybody’s wearing white shoes, white socks, white clothes, playing with white balls, everybody who plays is white. Where is everybody else? That was the moment I decided to fight for equality and freedom and equal rights and opportunities for everyone. Everyone. Not just girls. Everyone.” The quote described an “epiphany” she had and perfectly summarizes her motivation and focus to fight for equality. In 1981 Billie Jean King, against the advice of many people including lawyers, admitted to the world she was gay, in other words she “came out” in front of the press during a news conference. This conference shook the world. Billie Jean King was a very strong woman with a lot of power and fame at the time, and she publicly addressed her lawsuit and sexuality. Her fame made this big news and caused much of the LGBTQ society to come and support her, though not all. Billie Jean King said that people don’t have to agree on gender, race, sexuality, or any other classification, but everyone must follow the golden rule and treat everyone how they want to be treated. Billie Jean King was a person who realized her sexuality later than most. She was in love with her husband, Larry, and didn’t ever know she had an attraction for women in her early 20s. King slowly became a part of the LGBTQ community and realized she was gay. Eventually she figured out the truth about how she felt, and though she got divorced with her husband, they remained good friends and she felt she did what was right. Billie Jean King said to the world that she was happy with her decision and that finding self truth is the most important aspect of life (Laurie, 1999). Her courage and fight made a significant impact in helping the LGBTQ society expand and get the attention it needed to be accepted and understood. Without this courage to stand up to the world and speak her mind and heart, the LGBTQ society would not have gained the boost it did. Many athletes during admitted to being gay or lesbian, but most did this after retiring from their sport. Many athletes say they weren’t accepted or were harrassed because of it by teammates in the locker room (Scott, 2010). 
      Many gay athletes had success or achievements that brought pride to the United States and made them a named great in their nation leading to a more open and accepting nation. Bill Tilden won the Wimbeldon in 1920, and never hid the fact that he was homosexual. Tilden won more Wimbledon's national championships and even led the US to win the Davis cup. He was named the greatest tennis player of the half century. Tilden’s recognition showed that he a homosexual athlete was still a great athlete. People were discriminated against and didn’t feel other people who were different were equal. In a time like this, atheletes like Tilden showed that not only should different people be regarded equally, but that homosexual athletes can be just as good and have as much success as any other athlete. Many more people throughout the twentieth century are examples of this idea. Tom Waddell was in the Army and competed in the olympic decathlon. He also ended up marrying his partner Charles, and they were featured on the People’s Magazine, the first gay couple to be featured. Additionally, Waddell even held a gay olympic games in San Francsico. Bob Paris was a bodybuilding champion who revealed his homosexuality during an interview and married his partner shortly after. They were later featured on The Oprah Winfrey Show (“The brief history of gay athletes,” 1998). Just like these brave athletes and gold winning Bruce Hayes, other athletes have opened up about their sexuality and have shown the nation and world that athletes can be homosexual and still successful, and that homosexual people are also people, taking a major role in the fight for LBTQ acceptance as participants in America’s favorite entertainment. Society wasn’t fully how it is today back in the twentieth century. It was the century of women’s suffrage, Martin Luther King Jr. and anti-segregation efforts, and other aspects of society that lacked equality. John Locke wrote that all men are born with certain unalienable rights, and the American constitution states that “all men are created equal.” This was the freedom that the United States stood for and American athletes played a major role in bringing these statements to life in America and in the world. 
      Similar to the LGBTQ society, another highly controversial topic of the twentieth century was acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Arthur Ashe found out he had contracted HIV in 1988. Ashe got the disease due to a blood transfusion during heart bypass surgery in 1983. He was deeply saddened by this news for a while, thinking about his daughter and all he wanted to do. Arthur Ashe left many people astounded because he had no obstacles that would stop him. Even after contracting HIV, he bravely announced it to the world and fought for the people who would contract HIV or AIDS in the future (Berkow, 1992). He was always a part of social movements, but during these tough times, he was selfless and wanted to bring awareness to the United States about AIDS, a topic that the country heavily looked down on. Arhtur Ashe spent the remainder of his life giving talks at universities, participating in campaigns to educate the public on AIDS, and using his foundation as a tool for his work and goals. 
      Arthur Ashe was a man who not only fought for racial equality, but all social problems for all people. He participated in a major role in the community as a voice to speak up for many different people across the world. Arthur Ashe was a man who was a man with big focus on the Appartheid in South Africa. In 1969, there was a tennis tournament in South Africa that Arthur Ashe wanted to compete in. Knowing about Ashe’s history of speaking up and his public disapproval of the Appartheid system in South Africa, the South African officials denied Ashe’s visa to travel to the country and compete. Ashe, who was strongly against the Appartheid, used his experience and this event as a motivation for his social movements and the denial of his visa became a spark for the public understanding of the injustice done to Ashe and what the Appartheid truly represents. Years later, Ashe would be able to play in South Africa, getting his visa approved for the 1973 open. This led Ashe to become the only colored player in the tournament. Ashe always focused on fighting against the Appartheid and bringing justice to the many colored people who were suffering in South Africa. His efforts never went in vain because in the early 1980’s, Ashe co-chaired a commitee called Artists and Athletes Against Apartheid. His efforts played a major role in ending the Appartheid and bringing justice to many people including the release of Nelson Mandela from jail after nearly 30 years. The tennis star was notable in his efforts because of his push to influence others, evident when he said “I would like to flood South Africa with black personages of all sorts of persuasions: writers, educators, businessmen, you name it. If you are black and have any clout at all, I would like to see you go to South Africa and look for yourself and come back and try to use the tools that you have at your command to try and help the brothers down there.” Similarly, Ashe was also a big supporter of freeing the Haitians and was arrested a year before losing the battle to AIDS. He was arrested for protesting for the Haitians in front of the Whitehouse, which became quickly known across the country. He was a powerful influence and a symbol for the Haitian people who wanted to be freed, just as he was for African American equality and the Appartheid.

Impact of the Athletes’ Social Work : 
      The question that must be asked is how are star athletes and social reform connected. These great people were even more impactful for the causes that they fought for because they were athletes. Sports entertainment was an industry that grew largely in the twentieth century across very sports. Iconic songs, images, and ideas are born from the heavy influence of the sports world in the 1900s. A time with less technology, sports were America’s favorite pastime. This meant that the influence of athletes, especially star athletes, was big. Athletes were celebrities watched by millions of Americans nationwide. Many times this means that younger kids looked up to the athletes, and many paid attention to their opinions and stances. When younger kids and generations watch and understand some of the	positions these influential athletes take, it causes a change in mindset, though maybe not right away, over time. The transfer of information and a new mindset in younger people always leaves a lasting impact on society. In a more indirect way of impact, some players, such as Jackie Robinson and Althea Gibson, brought change to societal norms through their success and talent. When the common perception was that white people were better than colored people in every way, these athletes proved the entire nation wrong through their will to push against the restraints set on their privileges. Many people across the nation worked towards civil rights and equality as well as to change societal standards. Influential leaders such as Martin Luther King Jr. or Malcolm X can be named. The question that arises is what makes these athletes so special? It is true that they participated in protests or spoke their stances, yet the emphasis and significance of their participation lies in the sole idea that they had a large platform to speak out against the same issues. To simplify this idea, a similar situation would be if a parent were to tell their child to perform an action, but then the child’s favorite Hollywood actor comes and tells the child the same thing the parent said. Although the parents words are understood and the child may obey, when a celebrity comes and says the same thing, the child is more receptive and ready to act. 

Conclusion:
	The purpose of this essay was to evaluate the extent to which twentieth century athletes brought social change. Throughout the essay, various athletes were described and the work they did, direct or indirect, for social change has been analyzed. From Arthur Ashe to Billie Jean King, and across various social issues in the United States of America during the time period. The biggest social reform focused on during the twentieth century is the fight for racial equality. Yet, many other social issues occurred. Issues such as suffrage and other civil rights heavily evolved. Understanding this the essay covered other controversial or less talked-about issues that were impacted positively by the athletes described. Many of the issues, though still issues that remain to certain extents today, were changed in the mindset of the public and in societal norms. Having observed the players and their efforts, it is now important to draw the final conclusion.
	As we have analyzed the athletes of the twentieth century have made a significant impact on the societal issues discussed and more. Not only did athletes protest and fight against the adversity they faced, but many lit the country and forced a new thought process through their fame and brilliance in the sport. A key factor of their heavy contributions in social reform is the idea that the public was very interested in sports, and the sports world was the entertainment of the time. Had sports not been as big, the impact of the players would have been minimized.
	One can argue that these athletes still stood up for the causes or participated in events that would lead them to make a significant impact. The idea that must be understood is that the fame of the athlete and the sports industry’s success amplified the messages of the athletes and caused the people to be more receptive and open-minded.

Word count: 3,966













Bibliography
Arnold, Stanley Keith. “Arthur Ashe: Tennis and Justice in the Civil Bight’s Era.” Virginia Magazine of History & Biography, vol. 123, no. 2, Mar. 2015, p. 182. EBSCOhost, search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=b6h&AN=103090652&site=ehost-live.
Berkow, Ira. “The Changing Faces Of Arthur Ashe.” The New York Times, The New York Times, 25 Oct. 1992, www.nytimes.com/1992/10/25/sports/the-changing-faces-of-arthur-ashe.html.
Blackwell, Amy Hackney. "Althea Gibson." American History, ABC-CLIO, 2020, americanhistory.abc-clio.com/Search/Display/675682. Accessed 9 Jan. 2020.
“Game Makers: Bill Russell.” Sports: Breaking Records, Breaking Barriers, Smithsonian, amhistory.si.edu/sports/exhibit/gamemakers/russell/.
Gyurina, Scott. “Don't Ask, Don't Tell: The Plight of Gay Athletes in Pro Sports.” Bleacher Report, Bleacher Report, 1 Oct. 2017, bleacherreport.com/articles/429879-dont-ask-dont-tell-the-plight-of-gay-athletes- in-pro-sports.
“Jackie Robinson.” Jackie Robinson, u-s-history.com/pages/h2068.html.
Roach, Ronald. "Keeping the Ashe legacy relevant. (Arthur Ashe Jr. Sports Scholars 2003)." Black Issues in Higher Education, 10 Apr. 2003, p. 18+. Gale Academic Onefile, https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A100543580/AONE?u=j043910&sid=AONE&xid=b4d8fcbb. Accessed 8 Jan. 2020.
Schenden, Laurie K. “No Match For the Opposition.” Los Angeles Times, Los Angeles Times, 1 Mar. 1999, www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1999-mar-01-cl-12776-story.html.
“The Brief History of Gay Athletes.” ESPN, ESPN Internet Ventures, 18 Dec. 1998, www.espn.com/otl/world/timeline.html.
Vasilev, Stefan. “A Tribute to Jesse Owens: The Athlete Who Defied the Nazi Ideology.” Bleacher Report, Bleacher Report, 1 July 2009, bleacherreport.com/articles/210284-a-tribute-to-jesse-owens-the-athlete-who-defied-the-nazi-ideology.
Walters, John c. “The Changing Status of the Black Athlete in the 20th Century United States.” Black Athletes in 20th Century United States, 1996, www.americansc.org.uk/Online/walters.htm.

1






TO WHAT EXTENT DOES THE THE CULTURE OF THE ANTEBELLUM SOUTH
INFLUENCE THE CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT OF SCARLETT O’HARA FROM
THE NOVEL ​GONE WITH THE WIND​ BY MARGARET MITCHELL?

Group 1: Category 2

Word Count: 3,998

by
Sindhu Bommineni

Table of Contents

Introduction ……………………………………………………………………..…………….1
Scarlett and the Antebellum South Pre-Civil War Era .………………………………...…2
Scarlett and the South during the Civil War ...………………….………………………….6
Scarlett and the South Post-Civil War ………………………………….………...……….10
Conclusion ..………………………………………………………………..………………...14
Bibliography ..………………………………………..…………………………...…………..16

1

Background
Margaret Mitchell’s Gone With the Wind is the coming of age story of Scarlett
O’Hara, the first-born daughter of a wealthy plantation owner. Set right on the cusp of
the Civil War, the novel follows Scarlett through the Civil War and Reconstruction
period. The reader sees how Scarlett transforms from a young girl to a hardened
woman. This development precisely mirrors how the antebellum South also developed.
In Gone With the Wind, Scarlett and the South developed during the same time periods.
Considering the fact that the environment in which one grew up can have a large effect
on one’s personality, it is vital to examine the question of to what extent does the culture
of the antebellum South influence the character development of Scarlett O’Hara in the
novel Gone With the Wind? Scarlett O’Hara mirrors the South's development as the
South and her come of age together and are forced to go through similar trials together.

1

Scarlett and the Antebellum South Pre-Civil War Era
While Scarlett cared for her first husband, she didn’t care enough about Charles
Hamilton to marry him for something other than her own narcissistic reasons, just as
how the South refused to give up slavery. Before marrying Charles Hamilton, Scarlett
was the Belle of the County. At the beginning of Scarlett’s story at the County picnic, the
iconic scene introduces Scarlett to the readers as someone who values vanity over
everything else. At the barbecue, “Most of the young ladies were seated with partners
on the long benches that faced the tables, but Scarlett, realizing that a girl has only two
sides and only one man could sit on on each of these sides, had elected to sit apart so
she could gather about her as many men as possible” (Mitchell 76), causing the reader
think that Scarlett doesn’t value anything else except for making herself look more
superior compared to everyone else. This scene is true for the South at this particular
moment in history; on the brink of the Civil War, the South fired the first shot at Fort
Sumter for one reason only — to protect their way of life. They wanted to keep their way
of life because they thought it was better compared to everyone else’s (Foner 583).
When Scarlett is rejected by Ashley, the man she wants to marry, she marries Ashley’s
cousin even if she doesn’t like him to salvage her pride. When Ashley is rejecting
Scarlett, the reader meets the scandalous Rhett Butler, who later becomes a vital
counterpart to Scarlett. A focus on pride in the antebellum South influences Scarlett to
do whatever she can to make sure she keeps hers no matter how unhappy she is.
Scarlett keeps her pride by marrying a man she has absolutely no feelings for, only to
get back at Ashley. In fact, almost all of Scarlett’s subsequent decisions are driven by

2

Ashley’s rejection of her and Scarlett’s inability to let it go, just like the South was unable
to let go of the North's rejection of their way of life.
Although Scarlett is only married to Charles Hamilton for a very short amount of
time, she is still expected to follow all of the rules of being a widow in the South even if
they made her extremely angry. Marriage was the fundamental unit of life in the South,
and a woman's marital status defined her status. When a woman became a widow,
social etiquette demanded she goes into a time of mourning in which she was not
allowed to have much fun or partake in regular social activities such as dancing
(McIntosh-Byrd). However, she was still expected to support her family when in
mourning. During this time, Scarlett is expected to help the war effort, also known as the
Cause. At a fundraising event for the Cause, a patron instigates a dance auction for
unmarried girls to raise money. When Rhett Butler, also a nefarious businessman, bids
for Scarlett, the other matrons present don’t want Scarlett to dance with Rhett. But,
when Scarlett “leaped to her feet, her heart hammering so wildly she feared she could
not stand, hammering with the thrill of being the center of attention again, of being the
most highly desired girl present and oh, best of all, at the prospect of dancing again”
(Mitchell 210), Scarlett not only proves how much she hates the restrictions preventing
her from being her old, flirtatious self, but she also demonstrates a blatant disregard for
authority and what people might think of her. This dismissal of her peers’ judgment
foreshadows a time in which Scarlett completely ignores all etiquette rules to do
whatever she wants. Scarlett ignores social etiquette and risks becoming alienated from
her circle because she wants to go back to the way things were, reminiscent of how the
antebellum South also didn’t want to change.

3

Scarlett not only demonstrates the antebellum South’s character by resisting
change but by also differentiating herself from other women. Antebellum women were
sticklers for following social etiquette, and not following etiquette brought shame onto
their families (Jones). Predictably, Scarlett has no patience for these strict social rules
even though she respects many of these ladies greatly. During the war, Scarlett stays in
Atlanta after Ashley Wilkes asks her to look after his wife, Melanie, even though she
hates it there. Scarlett only does what Ashley asks of her in the hope of gaining favor
with him. At the same time, whenever Ashley writes to Melanie, Scarlett reads every
one of those private letters because “all she wanted to know was whether he wrote
impassioned letters to his wife” (Mitchell 295). In doing so, she betrays her friend
Melanie's trust and acts very differently from every single antebellum woman. Not only
does she do something unladylike by betraying someone’s confidence, but she is in
love with another woman's husband and still hopes that something could happen
between Ashley and her. When Scarlett reads Ashley’s letters, she demonstrates that
she doesn’t care about anybody’s happiness but hers and will do anything to get it. The
opposite of a proper antebellum woman, Scarlett doesn’t care how vain or selfish her
actions make her seem because she doesn't think about the consequences. When the
South declared war on the North, they never thought about the implications of the war
or what might happen in the future. Instead, they were solely focused on their
narrow-minded goal of winning the war without thinking about the big picture. There
were many differences between the North and South, with most advantages pointing to
the North. Unfortunately, Scarlett is exactly the same. She doesn’t take the time to

4

understand her feelings towards Ashley and consider the consequences her actions
could have in the future.

5

Scarlett and the South during the Civil War
After Atlanta is attacked by the Yankees, Scarlett goes back to Tara to take
comfort in something familiar as the South also sticks to its familiarity. Still stuck in the
old days, Scarlett doesn’t realize that nothing is left for her at Tara. When the Yankees
come to town, they ravage and pillage the rest of the plantations around Tara but leave
Tara alone to use as shelter. But, everything inside of it, from the cotton stores to the
food, was gone. So, when Scarlett and her family came to Tara, they were entirely on
their own with acres and acres of farmland that had the potential to produce food but
only with hours of labor. With the slaves gone, the only option Scarlett had was to start
farming the land by herself to get food for them. By vowing that “no, she could not,
would not, turn to Gerald's or Ellen’s families” (Mitchell 420) because:
The O’Haras did not take charity. The O’Haras looked after their own. Her
burdens were her own and burdens were for shoulders strong enough to bear
them. She thought without surprise, looking down from her height, that her
shoulders were strong enough to bear anything now, having borne the worst that
could ever happen to her. She could not desert Tara; she belonged to the red
acres far more than they could ever belong to her. Her roots went deep into the
blood-colored soil and sucked up life, as did the cotton. She would stay at Tara
and keep it, somehow, keep her father and sisters, Melanie and Ashley’s child,
the negroes. (Mitchell 420).
Scarlett does something that is revolutionary for women of her status at that time — she
works. And she doesn’t just manage the farm; she does hard, manual labor. Although
women were integral parts of plantations during the antebellum South and ran whole

6

plantations at a time, they were always under the rule of men (Foner 876). Most
plantations were kept running with the men in charge of the actual farming itself, while
the women were tasked with caring for all of the slaves and children. So, when Scarlett
single-handedly declares that she would take over caring for Tara and make it functional
so that she, Melanie, Wade, Beau, Gerald, Suellen, Carreen, and some slaves who
stayed behind would survive, it was something that no one expected that she would
ever do. They didn’t think it would be possible to make Tara profitable again. By
declaring that “Yes, Tara was worth fighting for, and she accepted simply and without
question the fight. No one was going to get Tara away from her. No one was going to
set her people adrift on the charity of relatives. She would hold Tara, if she had to break
the back of every person on it” (Mitchell 435), Scarlett chooses to be independent and
rely on herself for survival. While other girls of Scarlett’s status in her town were
marrying Northerners to guarantee that they would have some position or money in the
future, Scarlett refuses to tie herself down and be forced to listen to a male authority
figure. This independence is what makes her so different from other women during her
time; she knows that she can survive by herself on her own and is willing to do
absolutely anything to get what she wants. Scarlett’s and the South's belief in
independence is something that developed in a similar fashion.
Scarlett’s declaration of her intention to bring Tara back to its former glory marks
a shift in her character, just as people in the South also realize what it means to survive
without slave labor. Scarlett goes from someone not wanting to be forced into a widow's
role to instead forcing others into a role they had never wanted. Her sisters, Suellen and
Carreen, absolutely refuse to do any work, particularly when Scarlett declared that they

7

had to go into the fields and pick cotton like field hands. But, they too started picking
cotton with Scarlett when she “poured a gourdful of water” (Mitchell​ ​455) onto Suellen
so she would stop being high and mighty about doing hard work. These acts right here
are part of Scarlett’s transition from a vain, pretty girl to someone who knows how hard
it is to survive. She adapts from having had slaves to do all her work for her in the past
to doing manual labor, something that would’ve been unheard of before the war. Around
the South, others are also starting to realize the difficulty of their life without slaves to
help them.
Scarlett and the South start to show their personality changes even more as
Scarlett navigates through all of the small obstacles she faces in saving Tara, and the
South continues throughout the war. From killing the Yankee trying to steal their
supplies to having all of the cotton they hand-picked to see them through the winter
being burned by Northerners who pass through their town causes Scarlett to think about
survival and nothing else. The emotions that make us human start to slowly fade from
Scarlett's mind. While thinking what a pity it was that Suellen couldn’t marry her long
time beau, Scarlett only thinks about how the marriage would have been “one less
mouth to feed” (Mitchell 428), rather than feeling some pity for her sister. If Scarlett were
like other ladies, she would’ve focused more on what this meant for her sister and the
family and how Suellen would feel, rather than thinking crass thoughts about surviving.
This change in attitude also mirrors the South’s mood during this time. When Scarlett
was at Tara, all of the South was at siege. People had no choice but to make hard,
tough decisions that they had never even dreamed of making before so that they had a

8

little bit of food they could eat. Scarlett understands this, and so she hardens her heart
in preparation for what lies ahead of her.
After Scarlett learns about the now broken prospect of Frank Kennedy marrying
her sister, her desperation shows enough that it is the first time others outside of her
tight-knit family learn about how Scarlett does not act as a regular lady. One day, a
group of Confederate soldiers comes over for dinner to Tara when passing through the
County. During dinner, the soldiers try not to upset the ladies and only tell the war's
happy stories. Melanie, Suellen, and Carreen are satisfied with their explanations, but
Scarlett is not at all fooled. When the rest of the girls have gone to bed, Scarlett
demands an explanation from Frank, and using the information he gives her, she starts
to make plans about acquiring food and supplies while the rest of them listen to the
story and don’t make connections between the info and their needs. When Scarlett
made that connection, she showed how she changed from a sheltered teenager to
someone who now had other, helpless people to take care of. Scarlett was desperate
for anything that could put her one step ahead of others in the race for survival. As the
South is increasingly surrounded by Union soldiers, they also become increasingly
desperate, just like Scarlett.

9

Scarlett and the South Post-Civil War
After the war, survival isn't enough to pacify Scarlett O’Hara’s or the South's
hardened hearts. They both want to be more and ensure that nothing can ever happen
to them or the things they care about. One such instance is when the Carpetbaggers
increase taxes on Tara that are impossible for Scarlett to pay, she believes that Rhett
Butler will help her out. However, when she seeks out Rhett in Atlanta, her pride keeps
her from seeing everything that Rhett has to offer. Believing that she has no other hope
when she sees her sister’s fiance Frank, Scarlett does something that embodies the
new South and its Carpetbaggers ​—​ she lies for money. Suellen was already engaged
to Frank, but when Frank starts talking about how much money he currently has and
also his plans to expand his businesses, Scarlett looks Frank in the eye and lies to him
that Suellen’s “going to marry Tony Fontaine next month” (Mitchell 597), even when
Suellen was not. Scarlett does this because she feels that she can use Frank’s money
to save Tara, which she believes is the most important thing in her life, and that she has
to fulfill her duty, no matter the manner. She believes that her choices are the only ones
that matter and forgets the values that she not only placed great importance in before
the war but also why she loves Ashley, who is the perfect embodiment of a pre-war
gentleman. While Scarlett and the South before the war were fighting for family and
their way of life, Scarlett stealing Frank from her little sister represents the attitude of the
new South ​—​ opportunistic mixed in with a bit of desperation.
However, unlike Scarlett, some Southerners are unable to let go of their old
beliefs because they want nothing more than to go back to their old way of life. Scarlett
realizes this when she attends a wedding in Atlanta and sees everyone dancing as if the

10

war had never happened. She starts to wonder “Why did these people persist in making
the gestures of the old days when the old days were gone” (Mitchell 602), and soon
realizes that the difference between them was that “Even though they’re poor, they still
feel like ladies and I don’t. The silly fools don’t seem to realize that you can’t be a lady
without money” (Mitchell 609), thus causing the gap between Scarlett’s old way of life
and her new persona to further widen. This gap signifies how differently Scarlett reacted
to the war compared to everyone else. Her old social circle wants to continue going on
as though the war didn’t happen. The women continue to believe that because they
were born ladies, they deserve to be treated as one and continue to hope that their
‘breeding’ constitutes them being superior. Scarlett shifts into the Yankee mindset here
because she “could not help thinking the Yankees were right on this one matter, even if
wrong in all others. It took money to be a lady” (Mitchell 610). This mindset right here is
why Scarlett does what she does ​— ​she never wants to feel as if she has lost the status
and security that she has before the war. This survivor mentality reflects on parts of the
South after the war; while many middle class and poorer folk before the war earned
large amounts of money during Reconstruction by doing something different, the
wealthier classes had generally lost all of their wealth because they refused to change
their mindsets. Scarlett understands this when she observes that “There’s still plenty of
money to be made by anyone who isn’t afraid to work - or to grab” (Mitchell 611), thus
furthering her resolve to be more like the Yankees and let go of her morals to keep
making more money. In Scarlett's mind, fighting for Tara was her duty, and nothing
would stop her from doing her duty. She is one of the few from the more affluent classes
that try to rescue their plantation and earn money during the Reconstruction. While this

11

is unlike many previous rich Southerners, it represents many lower class Southerners'
post-war mindsets.
Scarlett's constant need to feel superior represents the feeling that the South
also desperately wanted to achieve. As much as Scarlett wants to let go of her old
values, she shows that she is unable to do so because of her hope for a relationship
with Ashley Wilkes. Although Scarlett has been in love with Ashley since before she
married her first husband, Ashley has always been reluctant to return her affections.
Their stolen moments together, from when Ashley returns home for a visit during their
time at Tara, and finally, when they are caught together, paint a picture of how Scarlett
longs to return to a time where gentility and chivalry were valued. Because starvation
and managing Tara have hardened Scarlett, she wants to return to the olden days
where she rarely had to worry about anything. However, Scarlett doesn’t long for Ashley
because of his manners or values; she wants him so much because she regards Ashley
as the poster for a romantic, old-school boy who is too weak to say a word when she
does something that might bring shame to their family. While married to Rhett, Scarlett
continues to long for Ashley while thinking how “It would be pleasant to feel superior to
Rhett” (Mitchell 854). We can assume that Scarlett wants to be married to Ashley rather
than Rhett because Scarlett has this image of Ashley in her head that is not the same
as who he really is. Clinging to the old way of life in the South, Ashley would never
understand who Scarlett has become in her quest for survival. Scarlett’s management
of Tara and how she handles the threat of losing Tara would’ve put a strain on Ashley
and Scarlett’s relationship because Ashley would’ve condemned her actions. In
contrast, Scarlett wouldn’t have cared what Ashley thought, just like she didn’t care

12

what everyone else thought about her either. The South tried to rebuild as much as they
could to show the Northerners that they could also survive, but the superior feeling that
they wanted to portray could not be achieved.
Both Scarlett and the South refuse to be stuck in the past because it hurts them
too much to look back. The final words that Rhett Butler says to Scarlett illustrate the
severity of her shift. When Rhett defeatedly utters the famous phrase “My dear, I don’t
give a damn” (Mitchell 1035) in response to Scarlett’s question about what she will do if
Rhett goes away, Scarlett shows the reader her childish personalityone last time ​—​ she
doesn’t know the value of who has been by her side her whole life. Even after it is
evident that Rhett is so clearly done with Scarlett and all her whimsies, her last thought
is still that “Tomorrow, I’ll think of some way to get him back. After all, tomorrow is
another day” (Mitchell 1037). This last thought only further connects Scarlett to the new
South - they both have a desperate hope inside of them because they don’t want to feel
anything else. Scarlett has lost her true love, and the South has lost the lives of millions
of lives of its soldiers. If Scarlett and the South think about the past, they’ll both crumble
as one does when stuck in the past.

13

Conclusion
Scarlett O’Hara embodies the changes of the South through the Civil War. She
changes from a spoiled, vain teenager to a relentless widow, and finally to a wealthy
self-seeker. This change follows the changes of the South as before the Civil War, the
South was chasing small dreams; during the war they were working hard to protect their
territory after realizing winning the war wouldn’t be too easy, and after the war the South
was trying to rebuild their territory and lives from all of the destruction that the North had
caused them. Ashley Wilkes represents the Old South, weak and always focused on
chivalry and manners, while Rhett Butler symbolizes the New South with his harsh and
opportunistic personality. The changes of Scarlett’s homeland definitely had an
influence on the development of Scarlett’s personality throughout the novel, but
Scarlett’s time at Tara cannot be forgotten. Her time at Tara is when the last of her
childish innocence and fantasies are gone, and when Scarlett realizes that survival
won’t be as easy as she initially thought it would be. When Scarlett and Melanie are
forced to leave Atlanta, they left their old personalities behind. Although Scarlett merely
follows the antebellum South's changes, she never stops yearning for the old days. By
knowing how it feels to go hungry and having experienced utter hopelessness multiple
times, Scarlett is irreversibly changed from a spoiled brat to a hardened, mature
woman.
Regardless of how many changes she goes through, Scarlett never seems to
reflect on what is there right in front of her. She doesn’t realize until the end of the book
what her true feelings are ​—​ that she loves Rhett Butler and not Ashley. So while
Scarlett undergoes multiple changes in regard to her work ethic, business, and

14

leadership, she is never able to conquer her emotional side. In the end, she loses Rhett
and everyone else that she considers dear to her because she doesn’t care about the
values such as honor and kindness that make us human. Even though she is left alone,
her survivor mentality propels her to keep going because she knows that there must be
light at the end of the tunnel. While the reader can only guess as to what happens next,
it is safe to assume that whatever happens next will end in Scarlett thinking she is
happy and content the way she is now, even if everyone around her except for Scarlett
knows it is true. Following Scarlett’s journey causes the reader to be left with only one
emotion at the end - pity.

15

Bibliography
Bevilacqua, Kathryne. "History lessons from Gone with the Wind." ​The Mississippi
Quarterly v​ ol. 67, no. 1, 2014, p. 99+. ​Gale Academic Onefile​,
https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A436232543/AONE?u=j043910&sid=AONE&xid=0
c8ac​232. Accessed 9 Jan. 2020.
Foner, Eric. Give Me Liberty! An American History. Vol. 1, ​W. W. Norton & Company​,
2011.
Jones, Catherine A. "Women, Gender, and the Boundaries of Reconstruction." ​The
Journal of Civil War Era, v​ ol. 8, no. 1, 2018, p. 111+. ​Gale Academic Onefile,
https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A524380337/AONE?u=j043910&sid=AONE&xid=3
4b67652. Accessed 10 Jan. 2020.
McIntosh-Byrd, Tabitha. "Overview of 'Gone with the Wind'." ​Literature Resource
Center​, Gale, 2019. ​Gale Literature Resource Center,
https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/H14230031244/LitRC?u=j043910&sid=LitRC&xid=
79f0​ daf5. Accessed 13 Jan 2020.
Mitchell, Margaret. Gone With the Wind. ​Macmillan Inc.​ , 1936.

16

